Blockchain Organizing
for Managers

First edition, May 2018
© Paul Bessems and Walter Bril
Cover picture: based on image © Zinco79| (www.dreamstime.com/35996695)
Cover design: Maarten Brons
Editor: André de Greef
Both authors work at Weconet Blockchain Technologies (www.weconet.org). Weconet is a spinoff of the Weconomics Foundation. Weconomics is primarily a way of thinking, a way of organizing projects with three pillars: organizational model, infrastructure and transition program. This
book is part of the Weconomics program. Most of the Weconomics books are in Dutch at the
moment. When you are member of the Blockchain Organizing Center of Knowledge (see
www.weconet.org/block), we will translate the references in this book from Dutch to English
for you.
The following books are included in the Weconomics program:
Book1: ‘Every day when the sun rises: the history of the community economy’ (2010)
Book2: ‘Weconomics: how will you survive the 21st century as information worker?’ (2013)
Book3: ‘Weconomics analysis: why our welfare machines need to be replaced’ (2013)
Book4: ‘Weconomics theory: organizational science for Weconomics’ (2013)
Book5: ‘Weconomics practice: practical advice for setting up communities’ (2013)
Book6: ‘Blockchain Organizing: foundations for a new social-economic order’ (2017)
Book7: ‘Blockchain Organizing for Managers: The Reinvention of Management’ (2017)
Book 1, 2, book 3, 4 and 5 (also called the Weconomics Trilogy) and book 6 are only available in
Dutch at the moment. More information about Weconomics program: www.weconomics.org
(Dutch) or www.weconet.org (English)
Published via: Mijnmanagementboek
ISBN: 9789463678223
Although this edition was carefully prepared, the authors and publisher do not accept any liability
for possible errors and imperfections, nor for direct or indirect consequences thereof.
Subject to the exceptions set out in or pursuant to the Copyright Act, nothing from this edition
may be multiplied, stored on in automatic database or made public, in any form or way, either
electronically, mechanically, by photocopying, recording or in any other way, without prior written permission from the publisher. Insofar making reprographic multiplication of this edition is
allowed based on article 16h of the Copyright Act, one must pay the legally owed fees to the
Foundation Reprorecht (P.O. Box 3060, 2130 KB Hoofddorp www.reprorecht.nl). For copying
part(s) of this publication in anthologies, readers and other compilation works (article 16 Copyright Act) one should turn to the Foundation PRO (Foundation Publication and Reproduction
rights Organization, P.O. Box 3060, 2130 KB Hoofddorp, www.stichting-pro.nl).
For more background information with this book, including a literature list and blockchain
knowledge center, see also the website: weconomics.org (Dutch) and weconet.org (English).

Blockchain Organizing for Managers
- The Reinvention of Management -

Paul Bessems
Walter Bril

“The most important, and indeed the truly unique, contribution of management in the 20th century was the fifty-fold increase in the productivity of the manual worker in manufacturing. The
most important contribution management needs to make in the 21st century is similarly to increase
the productivity of knowledge work and knowledge workers. The most valuable assets of a 20thcentury company was its production equipment. The most valuable asset of a 21st-century institution (whether business or non-business) will be its knowledge workers and their productivity.” (Peter Drucker, 1999)

Content
Preface
1. Introduction .................................................................................................................. 9
1.1
What do you need to do business? ............................................................... 12
1.2
Is it time for a paradigm shift? ...................................................................... 18
1.3
Blockchain by Design ..................................................................................... 22
1.4
Some concepts ................................................................................................. 28
1.5
What is Blockchain Organizing? ................................................................... 32
1.6
Blockchain within your organization?.......................................................... 34
2. Blockchain as organizational concept..................................................................... 39
2.1
Context: digitalization ..................................................................................... 41
2.2
Basis: trust, values and transactions ............................................................. 44
2.3
Old organizing ................................................................................................. 50
2.4
New Organizing............................................................................................... 51
2.5
Five basic principles of organizing ............................................................... 52
2.6
When hierarchies become markets ............................................................... 62
3. Blockchain as technology ......................................................................................... 69
3.1
History ............................................................................................................... 71
3.2
The Bitcoin blockchain .................................................................................. 78
3.3
Different types of blockchains ...................................................................... 85
3.4
Blockchain concepts and tools ...................................................................... 95
3.5
Blockchain for communities........................................................................ 114
3.6
Blockchain standardization .......................................................................... 121
3.7
Blockchain is industry agnostic ................................................................... 129
4. What does it mean for your organization? .......................................................... 133
4.1
Which problems can you solve with Blockchain Organizing? .............. 134
4.2
Blockchain for the organization of money, trade and economy ........... 141
4.3
Organizing work ............................................................................................ 144
4.4
Organizing supply chains ............................................................................. 151
4.5
Organizing government tasks...................................................................... 155
5. How to start with Blockchain Organizing? ......................................................... 159
5.1
Blockchain lead .............................................................................................. 160
5.2
How do you start and how do you move.................................................. 169
5.3
Project-related approach .............................................................................. 178
5.4
Dealing with resistances ............................................................................... 184
6. The future of Blockchain Organizing................................................................... 191
6.1
Blockchain power .......................................................................................... 191
6.2
Blockchain stages........................................................................................... 193
6.3
Where blockchain should not lead to ........................................................ 196
6.4
Innovation Strategy: towards a decentralized cooperation perspective 200
6.5
Blockchain in the near future ...................................................................... 202
6.6
The future of Blockchain Organizing ........................................................ 208
About the authors

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

1

Preface
What if selling your house would be as easy as sending an email? Big chance you
would not believe that this will become reality in the near future? But when internet
started nobody could imagine, that it once would be possible to operate Spotify on
internet. As Halfdan Mahler, former director World Health Organisation once said:
“What sounds idealistic today becomes realistic tomorrow”. But from ‘today’ to ‘tomorrow’ is
a long and difficult road where leadership and management can play an important
role. One of the key stakeholders, in the digital transformation and the transition to
a mainstream usage of blockchain, will be leadership and management. Will they act
pro- or reactive? Will they be ambassadors or resistors of change? Will they give up
some autonomy and believe in decentral decision making? One thing is clear: leadership and management must innovate more fundamentally then they did till now. According to fintech expert Chris Skinner the real problem is legacy leadership, not
legacy technology.
When you ask someone what the most important invention has been during the last
few centuries, you will probably hear: steam engine, electricity or, more recently, the
internet. Not many people will say: management. In general, management is not regarded as an invention or technology. Charles Perrow, an American emeritus professor of Yale and Stanford once said: “Organizations are systems for getting work done”. In
our digital era you could say: Organizations are digital technology to share information, make decisions and process transactions.
In our opinion: processing ideas into tools to combine humans and resources in order to perform activities in the most productive way is also a form of technology. So
we could agree on the idea that management is also a technology. But when we compare management with other technologies we can conclude that it hardly innovates,
at least not in a fundamental way. We have hardly seen any fundamental innovations
in management since its first invention at the beginning of the twentieth century:
Scientific Management (1911) and the first assembly line of Ford Motor Company
(1913). With management technology we don’t see an innovation pace that is comparable with other technologies such as information technology. But we believe that
this will change in the next generation.
Harvard Business School professor Clayton Christensen coined the term disruptive
technology. In his 1997 book, ‘The Innovator’s Dilemma’, Christensen separates new
technology into two categories: sustaining and disruptive. Sustaining technology relies on incremental improvements to an already established technology. But the light
bulb was not invented by the continuous improvement of the candle. Therefor you
need a quantum leap, you need a disruptive innovation. We strongly believe that
Blockchain Organizing, as a management concept or technology, is an example of
the latter. But disruptive technology often has performance problems because it is
new, appeals to a limited audience and may not yet have a proven practical application. A lot of people find it abstract but they use ‘abstract’ not in the proper way.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

2

Abstract means: let go of non-functional parts or back to basic. And Blockchain
Organizing is back to basic, back to the fundamentals of organizing. A lot of people
find this hard to understand because it deviates from what they are used to and the
complex world they live in. It seems that they avoid simplicities because they don’t
know what to do with the surplus that technology can create.
Innovations are often associated with matter, but you can also innovate ideas and
concepts (‘products of the mind’). Management is above all a type of social technology because we believe that management tasks such as decision making must be performed by people and cannot be done by protocols. Our claim as authors is that
management, as an invention, as a technology, has not changed fundamentally since
the ‘first’ Ford Motor Company assembly line started working at the Highland Park
Assembly Plant in October, 1913 in Michigan. Management was invented to align
capricious people: farmers, housewives and craft-men, into the systematic way of
working on an assembly line, between nine and five, in a building away from home.
1913 is also the year when the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) was founded in England, the first, what we now would call, HR community. Since then, management is not reinvented in a fundamental way.
Yes traditional management did its job: it doubled our standard of living on average
every thirty years. It brought us prosperity, but the context changed from factory
work to knowledge work at the end of the twentieth century. And for that matter,
management didn’t adapt in a way our productivity growth could keep up with the
rising costs of healthcare, education and safety. Management did a good job, improved over time but is still not replaced by something better as the enemy of good
as a result of a changing context. The candle has continuously been improved, but it
has not been replaced by the light bulb as mentioned before.
Some adjustments have been made to management, such as the recently introduced
agile and self-steering teams, or before that Lean Six Sigma and the implementation
of performance indicators. But these concepts have never challenged ‘the firm’ as a
superior way to organize work. They have, especially in the last decades, made insufficient contributions to the required growth in productivity and improvement of
trust. They are relatively small adjustments within an existing invention that mainly
involves the use of buildings, hierarchies, planning, informing, assessing, deciding,
awarding and punishing. The way we connect people and resources to tasks, projects
and targets in order to increase the productivity has not fundamentally changed since
Taylor and Ford.
Because many people do not consider management as an invention, there are many
different views regarding management innovation. The term innovation is mainly
associated with process and product innovation or ICT; not management innovation.
Most managers will say that the current work method is fine because everything has
been going well for quite some time. However, there are more and more undercurrents that indicate that things are not going so well after all. These include, among

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

3

other things, privacy concerns, regulation, bureaucracy and complexity, power concentration, inequality and lagging productivity. Management is and was meant to organize people and tools in such a way that the productivity and therefore the ‘standard of living’ improves. But traditional leadership and management are no longer
capable to tackle the social problems we are facing.
There is however a rapidly growing management technology that can perform many
of the existing (often mechanical) management tasks decentral, autonomously and
much more efficiently: it is called Blockchain Organizing. This technology will create
surplus time. We can move from the third (after agriculture and factories) work
sphere (offices) into the fourth ‘work sphere’.
Management (as technology) develops itself at a much slower speed than other organization technologies, so management, in its current shape, could quickly become
less relevant. Many traditional managers are still trapped in an existing paradigm of
what management is and the best way to handle it. On the other hand, more and
more organizations, such as Svenska Handelsbanken or the distributed company Automattic, adopt new organization methods and make maximum use of technology to
connect people and tools to activities. This means for example that the span of control within these organizations is more than 1:10, while this is 1:5 within traditional
organizations. So there are management concepts that operate fundamentally different from the way most organizations and managers are used to. One of these concepts is, as we as authors call it: Blockchain Organizing. Blockchain Organizing is the
combination of a disruptive technology (blockchain) with a fundamental new model
of organizing supply and demand (Weconomics). This book addresses the questions:
What is Blockchain Organizing, why is it important and what does it mean for managers and management innovation?
Since the seventies people started to do other work (from factory work to
knowledge-based and service work), but the methods with which we organize work
have hardly changed. The question that has been keeping us authors occupied for
years is: what is the reason that we, despite increasingly more and ‘better’ information
technology, share information increasingly worse, cooperate increasingly worse and
trust each other increasingly less? Why are there so many intermediaries required
between supply and demand to reduce uncertainty? Why is the capacity utilization
not improved, why can’t we safeguard our privacy better, trust each other better and
share knowledge better? Why has internet not made us more productive? Why have
markets not become more transparent? And why have we not become less dependent on large companies and central governments? Further on in this book we’ll see
that the number of managers and staff officials continues to increase despite the
present technology. You expect that technology would make us sufficiently productive but that is not the case. And now a new technology is emerging: blockchain. So,
will this organization technology indeed provide an improvement? Why would this
technology succeed where others failed?

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

4

To keep our organizations, economy and society going, we use tools such as management, money, contracts, brands and laws. These are ideas created by human minds.
These tools are organized by companies, banks and governments and are meant to
reduce insecurity and to install trust within our economy and society. In the organization theory we call these tools agents or institutions. Without these institutions we
would be unable to organize work, to trade, to make economies work and to enable
our society to function. However, these institutions have the disadvantage that they
make our society unnecessarily complex and bureaucratic. And as a result we need
more specialists to understand this complex world. These specialists must be attuned
to each other and therefore we need even more institutions, etcetera. In short: we
are all very busy, without making enough progress.
Many of the institutions that we use date from the time of Columbus and the Industrial Revolution. Nowadays we live more and more in a digital society. Trust can be
programmed as it were. That is in any case an important promise that is inherent to
blockchain and one that is proven by the Bitcoin blockchain until now.
The purpose of this book is to describe how to use blockchain technology for solving
social, organizational and management problems. We do not want to stimulate and
sell a new technology. In this book we do not extensively discuss Bitcoin as money,
as we might not need any money (physical or digital) in the future as a way to exchange values. The hype surrounding the price of a bitcoin, cryptocurrencies, futures
or the Initial Coin Offerings, illustrates again that when changing a technology, the
behavior of people does not automatically change with it. That will require more, and
most managers will be aware of this. Human behavior is mainly focused on satisfying
our conviction and needs. Too often useful new technologies are used in old organization methods with the purpose to strengthen existing positions or organizations
and therefore weakening new business models.
More and more banks buy fintech start-ups. Is that because they are interested in
solving social problems or to strengthen their existing position? Banks will start to
compete with each other on ‘who has the best blockchain’? But what if money and
banks become irrelevant? Therefore, it is important to realize that Bitcoin can take
many forms. Blockchain Organizing mainly concerns the exchange of values between seller and buyer. And Blockchain Organizing does this with minimum friction,
and at minimum transaction costs. Blockchain Organizing primarily concerns solving
management problems, secondly it looks as the organization model that can be used
best and tertiary it looks at the tools.
We believe that technology can actually add value to our society. That was also the
promise of the internet. But there was no clear problem to solve and we have used
the internet within an old management model. With the internet we did not fundamentally organize supply and demand differently, mainly the medium has changed:
the brochure was replaced by the website and the letter by e-mail. The relationship

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

5

between producer and consumer, government and citizen and employer and employee has not actually changed.
We see the shortcomings of the internet more and more, it is a beautiful technology
that is still used within the boundaries of a traditional management style and an old
socio-economic system. The internet did not increase our productivity sufficiently,
privacy is increasingly more difficult to safeguard, American internet companies are
becoming increasingly more powerful, elections are being manipulated and we find
it increasingly more difficult to distinguish between lies and the truth. More and more
people are aware that internet alone does not really help us to progress as we would
like: it gives us more and more insecurity and we trust each other less and less. We
can conclude that the internet is far from being completed; it is actually only in its
infancy. With the introduction of blockchain we get another chance to do it better.
Blockchain can be considered as the next stage in the development of the internet.
Not only does it enable the sharing of information, but values can be moved from
seller to buyer, without having to trust each other and, in principle, also without
money as exchange tool.
So, ‘the blockchain’ can be regarded as an additional layer on the internet: a layer of
trust. With the internet we can share information without any significant friction.
Sending e-mails (bits & bytes) costs almost nothing. With blockchain technology you
can transfer values (also bits & bytes) from supply to demand without irrelevant third
parties, without any significant transaction costs. This does not just apply to buying
a training course or consultancy service, but also doing the daily shopping up to selling your house on a blockchain. To bring supply and demand together against the
lowest possible costs is not just the essence of organizing work, but also the essence
of organizing our economy.
The essence of organizing is: look for a tool that can transfer values from supply to
demand against minimum friction (or transaction costs). Blockchain has a lot less
friction than the existing coordination mechanisms such as hierarchies, building,
management development programs and permanent contracts. We as authors of this
book support the potential of blockchain technology, but we are also worried about
the ‘hype’ around ‘the blockchain’. A hype can frame or slow down a fundamentally
good idea. A lot of sense, but also a lot of nonsense is written about blockchain. We
believe that a major breakthrough of using blockchain technology in several areas,
might take a decade unless we quickly become collectively smarter and also innovate
management technology in addition to blockchain technology. But we are slightly
less optimistic about this. Institutions that have been around for centuries cannot be
changed ‘overnight’. We believe that the core of the success of blockchain will not
be the technology, which normally finds it way, but leadership and the organizational
ability. This is a broad perspective that also includes: laws, politics, power, adaptability and management.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

6

So, we must not overestimate the power of technology alone. Technology is ‘only’ a
lever: an ability to realize something. Without being firmly grounded, without foundations, a lever does not work. When we start with new digital leadership, connect a
new technology to a fundamentally new management model the effect on the existing
organization methods can be huge. As a result, enormous resistances can arise. However now may be the best time for renewal. For us Blockchain Organizing is a fundamentally new way of organizing that can provide a large contribution to social
challenges, such as the crumbling welfare state, aging population, growing inequality,
fraud, tax evasion, propaganda, cyber security and climate change. It is definitely not
a panacea for all problems but it can contribute in resolving many social problems.
It has fundamentally different answers to the question how physical and data flows
should be organized. Although the impact can be huge in the long term, the embedding of Blockchain Organizing in our daily lives will be rather evolutionary than revolutionary. Changes will be made step by step comparable to the development of the
assembly line or internet for example.
In this book we mainly focus on the fundamental management innovation by operating organization technology, such as the internet and more recently blockchain, in
a smarter way. Tools will not have the desired effect if we, with the technology not
also change the methods and the institution with which we organize trust, work and
economics. If we stay trapped in the old leadership and the management innovation
of Taylor and Ford, blockchain will add little or even make it worse. Traditional
companies, banks and governments have had their days. They become irrelevant.
They are no longer the superior coordinating mechanism with the least friction. They
keep us unnecessarily trapped and at work. More and more people will become aware
that we create fake work to keep the illusion of full employment alive and avoid real
work at home, in local communities and to organize a more sustainable prosperity.
By operating Blockchain Organizing we become a lot more productive and we save
more time. We can use this surplus for the next step in our evolution: the sustainability of the prosperity we enjoy and to secure this for the future of our children.
That is also growth and progress. Growth is not just more in the ‘here and now’, but
also better and in the ‘there and later’. The first step to use Blockchain Organizing is
the transition from hierarchy to market. To differentiate between traditional markets
(markets between two hierarchies), we call these new markets also: network organizations. Management and leadership can play an important role in this transition,
both in a positive as well as in a negative way. When you see technology as a danger,
you will resist the introduction as much as possible, whether or not anonymously.
When you see technology as a basis of our evolution and progress, you will embrace
it and discover what your new added value will be. This book will also help you with
this.
Apart from a positive contribution to our productivity growth, Blockchain Organizing also ensures that personal data can be better protected. In the coming years more
and more organizations will face problems due to the new and much stricter

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

7

European privacy law (GDPR). The problems that we expect can no longer be solved
by more IT, lawyers or ‘Data Protection Officers’. The anticipated problems can only
be solved with another mind-set, new thinking, a new IT-architecture and a fundamentally new way of organizing supply and demand in a digital context. This will
increasingly happen with humans as the unity of design, as the starting point of organizing supply and demand instead of firms, banks and governments. People will
become owner of their personal data. Blockchain Organizing and concepts like Personal Data Service, Bring Your Own Data and Data Self-Determination will help
with this. The future of our digital society can be seen as an American barbeque party
whereby you bring your own food and drinks. When you buy a service from a company or government authority you yourself provide the data that this organization
requires to perform the business process, such as the printing of an address label by
the company Amazon to send you this book.
In addition to increase our productivity and securing privacy we also want to use
Blockchain Organizing to become less dependent on large tech companies. Blockchain technology can provide an important contribution to decentralization and the
construction of a general data common whereby we are less dependent on companies
like Facebook and Google, for using data, sharing files, messages or promoting products. This way, we the people will also be able to, jointly, curb propaganda in a much
better way.
A final incentive for companies to introduce Blockchain Organizing is to make processes more efficient. This can be useful in the short term, but in the long term more
and more processes will have to be transferred to shared information- and transaction networks. This means that processes must be ‘prepared’ to be transferred from
company to network. Currently for some organizations blockchain technology is
only considered as a technology to make processes within the existing system more
efficient while the system is the problem.
Our intentions with this book
How can you start with Blockchain Organizing in your own organization, supply
chain or ecosystem? Which innovations do you require for this and how do you
organize these? With this book, we want to help start-ups, enterprising people and
organizations to operate the management concept of Blockchain Organizing. This
book can help you to set up and implement a blockchain project within your organization or network. We, ourselves, have helped to set up many of these projects as
consultant, project leader and sometimes as an entrepreneur. These projects have led
to the design, development and setup of shared information and transaction networks. Through this book we like to share our acquired knowledge, experience and
methodology. For example, this book offers some kind of organizing capacity, a process and proven method for your own project. Purpose is to implement your idea in
terms of Blockchain Organizing within your organization or maybe within a new
foundation, limited company or cooperative to be established. You could regard our
method of Blockchain by Design and our way of project-related working as some

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

8

Kickstarter with the difference that you not only could bring money together, but
also other building blocks, like a network, methods and techniques, a Blockchain
Organizing Center of Knowledge (BLOCK), infrastructure, transition program etcetera. Our intention with this book is to further strengthen the movement towards
a more sustainable prosperity with the help of organization technology.
What to do next?
If you would like to proceed with Blockchain Organizing after reading this book, we
advise you to appoint a ‘blockchain lead’ within your organization or network. This
lead is the first appointed person who keeps track of developments, advises management and, for example, sets up and supervises projects. A blockchain lead prepares
the organization to use Blockchain Organizing and is therefore some kind of forerunner or quartermaster. Some examples of the tasks:
▪ recording developments, visiting conferences, establishing network
▪ designing and setting up Proof of Concept projects and experiments
▪ creating conditions for a successful implementation
▪ coordinating different internal and external roles
Finally
This book is full of ideas about the use of blockchain technology, but not all ideas
have to be executed as described. A good book doesn’t do the thinking for you but
makes you think. Play with the idea of Blockchain Organizing and try to imagine
what it can do for you and your organization, without immediately having to decide
what you actually will do with it. To realize a fundamental change there will have to
be a good balance between the existing and new world. This means that we, with this
book, focus on both ‘traditional’ managers, consultant and policy makers as well as
dissenters, evangelists and pioneers and everything in between. The fact that you
have picked up this book probably means that you are fascinated by the idea of
Blockchain Organizing and that you in any case would like to know more about it.
We are aware that we sometimes might have chosen an explanation or example that
technically is not 100% correct or definitely has to be. On the one hand, this is due
to the fact that blockchain technology is still developing feverishly. In a number of
areas, no consensus has yet been found. On the other hand, we have chosen to give
a simplified (technical) explanation as this book does not primarily focus on blockchain technology or blockchain developers, but on management problems that we
want to solve and on organizational aspects of blockchain. If you want a further
deepening (both organizational as technical), we advise you to read our book ‘Blockchain Organizing: foundations for a new social-economic order’ (called book 6, see
also colophon, only in Dutch at the moment).
We hope you’ll enjoy reading this book.
Paul Bessems and Walter Bril
Eindhoven, the Netherlands, May 2018

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

9

1. Introduction
Imagine you lived a long time ago and looked at the sky, see the moon and
stars….You must have been thinking that you were the center of the universe and
that everything else was revolving around you. That was the prevailing view until
somebody called Nicolaus Copernicus came up with a completely different model.
He developed a different world view and stated: “Those things which I am saying now may
be obscure, yet they will be made clearer in their proper place.”
The majority of the people we as authors engage with nowadays don’t immediately
understand the new world view we are promoting. They ‘think’ in a similar way as
people did before Copernicus: that their job, department, company or industry is the
most important dot in the universe and that everything else revolves around it. Most
companies see themselves positioned between purchase and sales. When a new technology comes to their attention, they will probably integrate this new technology
from the perspective of their existing job or organization. The way they will organize
trust, work and economics will not be fundamentally changed as result of that new
technology. Their reasoning will be: ‘Let’s put this new technology in our organization and strengthen our business model’. They do not want to cannibalize their existing revenues. They assume or hope that it is just a new technology that will not
impact their business.
Well, Blockchain Organizing is not business as usual disguised as innovation. Blockchain makes value exchanges as easy as sending an e-mail. Blockchain has the potential to organize transactions and economics without the traditional institutions such
as money, contracts, brands and hierarchies. It even has the potential to disrupt modern institutions such as peer-to-peer business platforms and non-transparent algorithms. Uber, Facebook and other platforms are examples of new technology dressed
up in an old ‘business model’. You can put lipstick on a pig, but it’s still a pig. Blockchain Organizing has the potential to reinvent management and turn hierarchies into
markets and eventually into shared information and transaction networks. Not for a
few industries as internet did, but for most of the industries we know of.
Digitalization is not the same as automation. Automation started roughly in the midtwentieth century in a context of expanding industrially based organizations. It automated relative simple and routine processes such as bookkeeping and document
management and it stored data in databases instead of filing cabinets. All of this work
was done with ‘the firm’ as unity of thinking, analyzing and design. If you automated
processes at that time, it was within a department or a company, not within a business
ecosystem. As a result of this ‘firm based IT development’ process, we expect that
the vast majority of IT service companies still uses the ‘firm’ or a department as
starting point for their automation, which they unfairly call digitalization.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

10

You could say that digital transformation is automation plus the change of the organization model. Digitalization is processing transactions between the smallest organization units (humans and resources on the supply side and activities on the demand side) in an autonomous and decentralized way. This means actor-oriented design with the smallest building blocks in mind: humans and resources, supply and
demand. And when both technology and organization model fundamentally change,
most of the organizations that are unwilling or unable to adapt, will become irrelevant
with respect to organizing trust, work or economics. If they are no longer the most
efficient way to coordinate supply and demand, they will disappear eventually. In that
context, we expect that more and more IT-companies in Europe will become utility
companies that use and share a data common, similar to other utilities such as electricity grid, roads- and water infrastructures. It is possible that Europe, the USA and
China will develop different data infrastructures: Europe more private/public, the
USA more private and China more state controlled infrastructures.
Blockchain Organizing is a new management concept and concerns embedding a
disruptive organization technology (blockchain) in a fundamentally new organizational model (Weconomics). It promises to reorganize trust, work and economy. It
claims to largely replace money, contracts, administrations and hierarchies by programmable trust. Blockchain Organizing does not just improve productivity; it also
ensures more privacy and limits the power of large companies, banks and central
governments. The influence of Blockchain Organizing will be substantial in the long
term but its use in our daily lives will go step by step. Important is leadership and the
manager’s contribution to this process. In any case, you as a manager can no longer
ignore this new management concept. In the coming years it will not just affect your
position but probably also your organization and perhaps change it fundamentally or
even make it redundant. We can see ‘the blockchain’1 as the next stage of ‘the internet’2, but also as an additional layer to the internet.
Internet makes it possible to send a message in a secure way from sender to receiver.
But basically every time you send a message, you make a copy. The email you send
is in your ‘out-box’ and in the ‘in-box’ of the receiver. We find it okay to copy information when we send hundred carbon copies of an email. But when I, as a sender,
have to pay you and your neighbor each twenty euro and a make a photo of a twentyeuro bill and email it to you and your neighbor with the remark: ‘it is paid for’, you
probably will say: ‘that is not okay’. We find it not okay to copy money, or more
1 A ‘single blockchain’ does not exist. There are several chains of blocks. There is not one block-

chain. There are private blockchains (similar to intranet), public blockchains (similar to public
websites) and more hybride types (similar to login websites). They use different principles, techniques, governance models, protocols etc. When we use ‘the blockchain’ or ‘blockchain’ in this
book, we mainly mean this as a theme, as a (organizational technology) concept. Concepts like
blockchain technology, blockchain organisation, blockchain community and blockchain infrastructure are part of this.
2 A ‘single internet’ does not exist either. It is a collection of concepts, techniques, media, agreements, protocols, websites etcetera.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

11

general: values. And the receiver probably also wants to know, whether or not, the
sender is the rightful owner of the twenty euro bill. So basically, blockchain adds two
import functions to internet that already has secure transport from sender to receiver
in its protocol. These two functions are: are you the owner of the value you want to
send and do you send it only once? A blockchain secures these three important value
transaction characteristics.

Figure 1.1: Blockchain: additional layer to internet: internet of value or trust

Internet makes it possible to share information without almost any friction. With a
blockchain we can do business with each other, without having to trust each other.
The ‘only thing’ we must trust are the underlying mathematical proof, the organizational principles, the protocol and the people who design, develop and maintain it.
Blockchain Organizing ensures the proper organizational embedding of blockchain
technology. This allows us to coordinate, validate, process and store transactions. It
functions automatically and autonomously without the involvement of third parties,
such as notaries and accountants, and without any significant transaction costs3.
Suppose you have a community for demand and supply of management services like:
conferences, training courses, consultancy services and interim managers. With
Blockchain Organizing, and more specifically a smart contract, you can facilitate the
following processes: profiling, searching, selecting, approving, contract preparation,
ordering, confirming, planning, invoicing, paying, evaluating, registering, administrating and archiving. You will not do this on your own, but with and in your business
ecosystem. The core of Blockchain Organizing is transferring values from seller to
buyer. The ‘challenge’ is to do this at the lowest possible costs. The processes, required for these transfers, are mainly protocols with if-this-then-that-statements4.
3 See also the transaction cost theory of Ronald Coase, for example in his article: ‘The Nature of

The Firm’ (1937).
4 Also called IFTTT.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

12

Another example: suppose you want to sell your house. You need a notary for this.
This reliable third party normally performs four checks:
▪ Are seller and buyer the person they claim to be (authenticity)?
▪ Is the seller the owner of the house (ownership)?
▪ Does the seller sell the house only once (double spending)?
▪ Is the transfer form seller to buyer done safely (security)?
In principle, these steps can be programmed, as has been done with Bitcoin. This
means that we can, to a large extend, replace the organizing of trust by means of the
use of social institutions (such as traditional management), by the organizing of trust
through the use of blockchain technology. Social institutions have the disadvantage
that the complexity increases. Blockchain technology, provided they are used correctly, has the advantage that productivity will increase, privacy can be better assured
and the power of mainly American tech-companies will be reduced.
Blockchain technology is a type of organizational technology that makes it possible
to work much more efficiently, especially within offices where many knowledge
workers are engaged. Blockchain Organizing makes it possible to autonomously and
decentral perform almost all validation, administration and archiving processes without third parties and many existing manual management processes.
The best definition of a blockchain is a chain of blocks; a block is a collection of
transactions that (logically) have taken place at the same time and about which there
is an agreement that they have occurred. A transaction is transferring the value from
the seller to the buyer. The offering, searching, booking and paying of management
services can also be performed with blockchain technology. So, hardly any people
are required anymore to do this. Whether the implementation of blockchain technology will succeed, does not depend on the technology but on the used management
model and the guts to let go of existing institutions and striving for full employment
(making full use of the production capacity).
1.1 What do you need to do business?
Why does the number of managers in healthcare grow with an average twelve percent
per year?5 Why does bureaucracy cost us 1.3% in productivity growth? And why does
a ten-kilometer ambulance ride costs seven hundred euros? All questions that are
related to the core of organizing: uncertainty reduction and the organizing of trust.
As we can see in figure 1.3 organizing in its core includes: specializing, coordinating
and finalizing. Coordinating capacity brings specialists together to complete activities. In the example of the ambulance (finalization), these seven hundred euros do
not just cover the costs of the direct people and resources (specialization). A large
5 See for example: The number of NHS managers has grown by almost 18% in the four years

since the government introduced a ‘bureaucracy-busting’ shakeup of the health service, according
to the latest official data, see article in The Guardian: 'NHS gains 4,000 more managers but loses
GPs' (15-04-2017).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

13

part of the costs is spent on coordination between demand and supply, actually on
organizing trust and reducing insecurity. For example, we find it important that the
ambulance arrives on time, that the staff is well trained and that the equipment complies with the latest safety standards. We must be able to trust that the ride with the
ambulance does not make us sicker. Organizing this trust, reducing insecurity, costs
money. The question is not whether coordinating capacity costs money or not. The
question is which coordinating capacity costs the least money with the condition that
that way trust is organized must not lead to a more complex supply chain.
Complexity is growing
According to research by Gary Hamel and Michele Zanini6, increasingly more people
are employed in the trust industry. This creates bureaucratic organizations. While the
number of people in primary processes has been reduced, the number of managers
and supporting staff has almost doubled between 1983 and 2014. Despite, or maybe
thanks to, all kinds of investments in lean and mean programs, ICT technology and
management development programs, the number of managers is increasing. Managers have an important role: they reduce the insecurity in transactions7: they organize,
coordinate and provide trust so the primary process goes as expected. But they also
have an impact on the transaction costs. And when the transaction costs increase
and the primary turnover stays the same, productivity reduces.
Because the complexity is growing, the transaction costs increase. As a result, our
welfare becomes far too expensive. The productivity growth cannot keep up with
the increase in welfare costs. Healthcare, safety and education become too expensive
and the welfare state is crumbling, which partly explains the rise of populism. The
core of our welfare problem is that the costs of our welfare are rising much faster
than our productivity. It is okay to earn more or spend more on welfare as long as
the system becomes more productive. But despite investments and innovations like
internet, IT, cloud services, social media, management training courses and so on,
productivity has insufficiently risen to keep up with the rising welfare costs. This
phenomenon is also known as the productivity paradox.
We can no longer justify our welfare state with sufficient productivity growth. This
is not due to the absence of appropriate technology but because we strive for full
employment and use the wrong resources to organize trust and work. To break this
pattern, we must reinvent management and go back to the fundamentals of organizing work.
Economy is driven by complexity

6 Gary Hamel and Michele Zanini: 'More of Us Are Working in Big Bureaucratic Organizations

than Ever Before' (Harvard Business Review, 5-7-2016).
7 The ‘cooperation’ between two colleagues or between a colleague and a flex worker etcetera can
also be seen as a transaction with transaction costs.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

14

At the moment we create, often unconsciously, a complex world because we strive
for full employment in addition to innovation. For some reason we refuse to accept
a simple world because we are afraid to be left without any work. We create fake
work at the office to avoid real work at home. Plus, in accordance to the system we
‘must’ grow two percent per year. Almost every entrepreneur has growth DNA. But
the result is that we do not become more prosperous, but instead make our world
more and more complex and erode the earth. The only way to correctly deal with
complexity is to go back to the basics; to the smallest building blocks and the fundamentals of organizing work.
This is an important role for managers and the consultants who support them. There
is an important role for professionals who no longer earn their money with complexity but who want to contribute to provide more welfare for more people. The
strength of Blockchain Organizing is the simplicity of the underlying organizational
model. It is based on a limited number of basic principles of organizing work and
trust. All that Blockchain Organizing requires are the small building blocks: man and
resources and the connections between them. That is all! It is the perfect way to
cooperate in a smart way within and mainly between organizations. The beauty of
this disruptive management concept lies in the simplicity. It makes it possible to coordinate demand and supply without expensive institutions and with a good balance
between scalability and flexibility, competing and cooperating and the individual and
the community.
Trust paradox
When executing transactions, we are prepared to incur costs to reduce insecurity. But
if the various resources to reduce insecurity are not correctly aligned, the complexity
increases and therefore also the insecurity. In case of bad alignment, the insecurity
reduction creates a new problem: complexity. And an increasing complexity again
leads to more insecurity and distrust. This way a vicious circle of cause and solution
is created: in economic theory also known as reflexivity. This also leads to active
inertia: we do a lot, but we do not move. So, a paradox is born when organizing
demand and supply: by reducing insecurity, the insecurity increases. This paradox is
also called the trust paradox: In order to improve trust, distrust grows.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

15

Figure 1.2: The trust paradox: in order to organize trust, distrust grows

What is trust?
Stephen R. Covey8 formulated it as follows: “Trust is the glue of life. It’s the most essential
ingredient in effective communication. It’s the foundational principle that’s holds all relationships”.
Trust is a broad and difficult to grasp concept that is widely represented in our lives.
All four living atmospheres (personal, public, private and politics), learning atmospheres (art, sports, education and religion)9 and working atmospheres (agriculture,
industry, offices and welfare) require trust to make and maintain a connection. Managers wonder if they can trust their employees: for example, do you trust, as a manager, that your employee will perform the task correctly? Or do you trust that the
intentions are good and the employees stick to their agreements?
You could divide ‘trust’ in human aspects (human relationships) and resource aspects
such as craftsmanship. Emeritus professor Bart Nooteboom10 puts trust in a time
dimension: “Trust is of all times. It is pervasive and indispensable.” In his book ‘Trust:
Forms, Foundations, Functions, Failures and Figures’, he discusses organizing trust
within and between organizations. He also makes a link with the transaction cost
theory of Coase and Williamson. In his book he answers questions like: can trust
serve as a tool to manage relationships? Is trust a substitute, a condition or for example a result of a contract? According to Nooteboom trust is essential in order to
be able to make and maintain connections.

8 Stephen R. Covey (1932- 2012), was an American bestseller author. He wrote, among others,

the bestseller: ‘The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People’.
9 See also the Agora model (the world is much simpler than you think) develop by René Gude
(1957-2015), a Dutch philosopher.
10 Professor ‘Innovation Policy’ at the universities of Tilburg, Rotterdam and Groningen.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

16

Organizing trust is a ‘core activity’ for manager. However, trust is complex and versatile. It would require a separate book to discuss this further. For the purpose of
this book we can only share a few insights related to organizing trust11. Blockchain
Organizing, and the organizing of trust within it, only focuses on a limited part; trust
that you require to initiate and execute a transaction and to check and register the
execution. The correct execution of these processes subsequently has an impact again
on the next transactions and other aspects of trust. We mainly need trust when we
do not know the other party, for example a supplier, or do not know how this supplier will behave under certain circumstances. We need trust because purchasing and
sales do not take place simultaneously and at the same physical location.
It is important to know who to trust and what to trust. There are major differences
in how and to what extent we organize trust. A system that you must trust is more
abstract than a contract you can use to trust someone. There are categories of trust
whereby, for example, risk of damage, delivery time, distance, price, personal contact
or not, are characteristics that influence the need or expectation of trust. It is also
often difficult to establish afterwards what has betrayed the trust. Was it opportunistic behavior, a lack of research or the wrong competences? All these aspects results
in the innovation of a large number of instruments to organize trust and there is
Blockchain Organizing added to the long list of instruments to organize trust.
With blockchain technology we can organize trust much easier because we use a
technical script based on mathematical proof. We start from organizational principles, the smallest building blocks and the connections between them. In principle,
trust mainly concerns the connection between two people. Whether or not they will
use any resources for this is secondary. They can also use their experience, intuition
and hormones. But organizing trust is still difficult to make ‘feasible’, even with
Blockchain Organizing, human interpretations remain possible. Blockchain opens a
new road: trust between people starts where machine control stops.
Companies to organize trust
Many companies have turned organizing trust or reducing insecurity into a product
or service. For example, banks, governments, auditors, accountants, software companies, lawyers and notaries. Hierarchies, positions, permanent jobs and money: they
are all resources to reduce insecurity and to organize trust. But when these tools are
not coordinated in a proper way, they create the opposite effect. In organization
theory, we call these tools also: institutions or agents. When you merge a number of
institutions, an organization is created with a building, employees, an organogram, a
structure, a culture and an own ICT system. The most common order we use to
coordinate different tools are: the firm as a structure with the market as coordinating
capacity between firms. The firm itself is also a form to coordinate (internally) and
to reduce insecurity.
11 More about organizing trust in the book: ‘Blockchain Organizing: foundations for a new social-

economic order’ (Bessems & Bril, 2017), also called book6 (see colophon, only in Dutch).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

17

When organizing work, we choose by default to do the work ourselves (via the firm)
or to outsource it (via the market). An advantage of a firm is scalability a disadvantage
is its inflexibility. For a market it is the other way around. In our fast-changing world
we mainly need a hybrid form between doing it yourself and outsourcing, between
the firm or hierarchy and the market. Internet and blockchain are very scalable (with
six connections you know the whole world) and humans are very flexible. New organizational forms are decentralized platforms that bring specialists together and
carry out transactions when needed. For this to work, we need a good balance between scalability and flexibility. Structured flexibility is one of the five organizational
principles of Blockchain Organizing. More about this in paragraph 2.5.
Depending on third parties
When organizing trust, we depend more and more on third parties (agents or intermediaries), such as a notary and a bank when selling a house. We depend on institutions that we use to organize trust. Relatively little attention is given to the function
IT could have when organizing and actually automating trust. Blockchain technology
will change this. For this we mainly have to investigate the relationship between trust
and control. Trust and control are both a supplement as well as a substitute. Blockchain technology in particular can make a difference in organizing control (input
references, double spending, encryption, keys and digital signature) and therefore be
a supplement to trust. You could see trust as ‘giving more freedom’, and control as
limiting this freedom when you have transactions executed via a protocol.
You limit the freedom but provide more control and therefore probably more trust.
When you have transactions executed with human interpretation, you provide less
control and more freedom. In some cases man is better at organizing trust and in
other cases (often routine-like common transactions) a protocol is better. But to realize this we need a paradigm shift in the way we organize trust, work and economy.
Blockchain Organizing is a new way to organize management in relation to the organization of trust, work and economy. To understand the paradigm shift and the
strength of Blockchain Organizing, in the next paragraph we will go deeper into the
theory of New Institutional Economics (NIE) that explains, why, in our modern
times, we need so many intermediaries, between demand and supply.
Who produces trust?
You could ask to what extent the blockchain software development process is sensitive to the perspective of the people who design and develop the protocol? We think
that certainly on the design side, the designer is driven not only by a certain perspective on humans, society and societal problems, but also by the way communication
is organized or management is done, or how our socio-economic order is working
(or not working). It is probably no coincidence that the whitepaper of Satoshi Nakamoto was uploaded a few weeks after the fall of Lehman Brothers in 2008. A designer
designs from certain values, perspectives, principles and goals, all part of the ten core
connections of Blockchain Organizing (see also figure 2.6).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

18

Software development plays an important role within digital transformation. We
should not underestimate this role, nor overestimate it. Developers are an important
part of the trust machine but not the whole trust machine. Before a programmer gets
down to work, an IT architect has to develop a framework, a construction plan. And
before an IT-architect can start, an organizational designer has to develop an organization model and before that people, groups and societies have to find a common
ground to start from. First you have to identify the problem you want to solve, than
you can choose the organization model and then the tool.
You could ask the question here: To what extent does the person who designs and
programs blockchain software believes in the best aligned way to organize trusts himor her selves? Only the tool doesn’t change our behavior, a fool with a tool is still a
fool you could say. It is also important to have a dialogue with designers and programmers. To start and develop a blockchain community you also need to think and
talk about the ten core connections (see also figure 2.6). Besides this, an advantage
of Blockchain Organizing is that most blockchain software is open-source, transparent and verifiable and is often scrutinized by dozens, hundreds or sometimes thousands of independent programmers for potential back doors, bugs and other imperfections. It is therefore difficult to build something that others cannot check and
control. This characteristic of a blockchain community is also an important basis of
trust.
1.2 Is it time for a paradigm shift?
One of the key questions in the philosophy is: Why is there something instead of
nothing? Why is there management and why is there no management? Management
is there because more than hundred years ago farmers, craftsmen and housewives
started to work in the factory straight from home. These ‘fickle’ people had to fit
within the rhythm of the assembly line. By inventing management, time measurements, labor analysis, rewarding and punishing, this became possible. Management
got a function in the whole process. It ensured that people could be connected to
tasks in a way that increased productivity and therefore welfare. Since then the world
has changed but the way that we manage people and resources has not really changed
during that time.
Connecting humans and resources to a task entails, with the current way of managing, the deployment of a large number of intermediaries and therefore transaction
costs. In addition, the complexity and bureaucracy are increased unnecessarily. An
important advantage of Blockchain Organizing is that this concept makes it possible
to program trust and the execution of transactions in such a way that you do not
have to trust anyone, ‘only’ the entire network and the protocol. Therefore, more
and more institutions, which are now involved in reducing insecurity, will become
redundant. And this also reduces the complexity. Because most institutions in the
core are a set of instructions (technical script), we can program these institutions

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

19

rules as it were. Management will be divided into a social and technical script and the
technical script can be programmed and executed autonomous. To better understand
the influence of institutions on reducing uncertainty, we go briefly back in time and
we look at a new trend emerging within economics.
New institutional economics
For a long time, economists assume that markets are perfect and that man is a rational
acting being, who is fully informed and has absolute knowledge of the future. Within
this context an ‘invisible hand’ ensures the establishment of a price. Based on these
assumptions and under perfect competition, the coordinating capacity or market
mechanism creates an optimal allocation of the production recourses. Few institutions are required to realize this: established and enforceable property rights and a
perfectly operating market mechanism, for example to prevent fraud, will suffice12.
We know that these assumptions, especially in the present time, are not correct.
However, many classical economists have followed the aforementioned theory for a
long time. This theory is not complete and does not correspond with reality. For
these economists the functioning of markets based on the argument of Adam Smith
that economic actors who pursue their own interests and thus more or less automatically serve the general interest, is leading. The above classic image of reality is not
correct. Directors, who award themselves bonuses, do not do this to serve the general interest. We know that actors in a market are not fully informed and sometimes
even misinformed. Think of usury insurance policies, the influence of fake news and
propaganda on elections. With elections there is also a market between supply (voting
right) and demand (who will you vote for). This market, and perhaps especially this
market, is also influenced by information differences.
In a market for example, a seller, knows more than a buyer or vice versa. Sometimes
people make irrational decisions and markets need rules to function13. There are certain power and dependency relationships between market actors. To reduce insecurities in non-perfect markets, we innovate all kinds of tools that help us execute a
transaction. These tools, as indicated before, are also called agents or institutions in
the organization and economic theory. An important perspective, you could also call
it a field of expertise within economics, that deals with these tools and the questions
that we can solve with these, is called ‘New Institutional Economics (NIE)’.
Institutional economists expand existing economic insights with social and legal
standards and rules. In general we call this expansion of tools: institutions. These are
required to execute (market) transactions. A market is a form of institution (organized capacity), and stands in relation to seller, buyer and other institutions. Many of
12 These elements can also be seen in ‘the blockchain protocol’; proving that you are the owner

and ensuring that you can only spend a value once.
13 For example a competition regulator: a competition agency as a government agency. In the European Economic Area these authorities are coordinated by the ECA: European Competition
Regulator.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

20

these standards and rules are institutionalized and organized through institutes (organizations). In the Netherlands, there is for example an Authority Consumer and
Market (ACM) that promotes or indeed limits opportunities and choices for buyers
(including consumers) and sellers (including companies). The authority creates opportunities by fighting unfair competition and making it easier for sellers to enter an
existing market.
The origin of NIE lies within two articles of Noble prize winner Ronald Coase: ‘The
Nature of The Firm’ (1937), and ‘The Problem of Social Costs’ (1960). You can read
more about Coase14 and his transaction cost theory in book6. In addition to Coase,
the following people and Noble prize winners have contributed to this field of expertise: Oliver Williamson, Elinor Ostrom, Douglass North15, and Herbert Simon16.
You can read more about this in the Weconomics theory book.
Blockchain Organizing and NIE
As seen before, high transaction costs are a main reason for insufficient productivity
growth. After all, you have to share the same end result with more parties. People
believe that we become more productive because specialists have started working
more efficiently. But these people have ‘forgotten’ that the number of intermediaries,
the coordination or the managing of specialists, involves more costs. As seen in paragraph 1.1, the number of managers and staff positions only increases, despite all
kinds of improvement programs. This is because these programs, and therefore many
tools, regard the company as analysis unit and not organizing capacity. You can make
a company more productive but that does not mean that the entire chain also becomes more productive. More specialization, without appropriate coordination,
makes the problem worse. That is the paradox of the insecurity reduction (see also
figure 1.2).
The problem must be tackled at the core with a broader view, especially when you
start designing blockchain organizations. Institutional economists adopt a broader
view, towards more organizational aspects than economists. These aspects17 are also
discussed in the Weconomics analysis book and can be summarized as follows:
▪ Psychological (people's perspective)
▪ Economic (broad perspective)
▪ Social (including demographic aspect)
▪ Technical (including innovation aspect)
▪ Ecological (including externalities)
14 Coase, Williamson and North are also at the forefront of International Society for the New In-

stitutional Economics (ISNIE). The first chairman was Ronald Coase (1996). Now it is called:
Society for Institutional & Organizational Economics (SIOE). See also the website: sioe.org.
15 See for example: ‘Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance’, Cambridge
University Press (1990).
16 See for example: ‘Organisations and Markets’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 5, no. 2
(Simon, Herbert A. 1991).
17 Also called the ‘PESTEP’-perspective.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

21

▪ Politics (including democratization)
When innovating and applying a new management concept such as Blockchain Organizing, it is important that the natural inertia of people is taken into account. People cannot be forced to change, however people do change. People have a certain
adaptability, especially when it comes to a new technology that threatens their job.
Due to this inertia, organizations change slowly and an economy and society will
require time to adjust itself to the new and often better ways of organizing. It requires
time and attention before people dare to let go of existing self-evidences, conditions
and institutions, even when they already know that the existing order does not work
correctly. The new world that is being proposed is initially still abstract for many.
They cannot imagine enough advantages and practical applications yet to dare to let
go of the existing ones. This definitely also applies for Blockchain Organizing, which
initially comes across as abstract, technical and complex.
Then the question quickly arises: how can a complex technique reduce the complexity? Initially, many will mainly feel the negative side (way of fear) of the innovation
and not yet the positive one (towards happiness). It is easier to see what we can lose
to robots than what we can gain for ourselves.
During the transition it is definitely important to clearly communicate that organizations can also use organizational technology to finish work quicker. At this moment
organizations will probably respond to insecurity and complexity in two ways:
1. Reducing the insecurity and complexity by using more existing resources; for example, more management, staff, IT, structure and procedures.
2. Innovating in new technology and management concepts such as Blockchain Organizing. It is important that organizations are aware that innovation does not
happen automatically and that it is necessary to invest time and money. Organizations will have to learn before they know what works and what does not. When
you are too early, this investment can have negative results, but also when you are
too late. The right timing is just as important as the innovation itself.
These two ways are reflected in our approach, in our consultancy practice and blockchain projects support: both solving short time problems as well as tackling long
term challenges. You will find more information about setting up your own blockchain projects in chapter 5. In any case, the insights of NIE will help with the design
and further development of blockchain organizations. But we are not there yet with
just a theoretical basis. We will also have to change our way of thinking and designing.
Concepts such as design thinking help to apply Blockchain by Design.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

22

1.3 Blockchain by Design
Apple founder Steve Jobs once said: “That's not what we think design is. It's not just what
it looks like and feels like. Design is how it works.”18 According to Jobs, creativity and
imagination are important conditions for design thinking. When you ask creative
people how they did something, they often feel guilty. They have done nothing, they
only saw something new. But you can only see something ‘new’ if you first can let go
of the ‘old thinking and acting’. Creative thinkers and dissenters must compete with
the old establishment. According to the existing power, and the experts they consult,
old is probably better, because it has proven itself. New is often abstract and insecure.
Therefore, dissenters are often amateurs in the eyes of experts: they do not understand. According to the famous expert, the world is much more complex than the
newcomer imagines. However, they forget to realize that the world is not complex
but that it is made complex, that is a totally different thing.
Complexity, cynicism and work pressure are increasing
A recent study19 of the HIVA20 shows that one in three surveyed employees ‘always’
or ‘often’ suffers from stress at work. This number is rising and is mainly due to the
turbulent environment and complexity of their work. In addition, the number of care
tasks at home is also increasing. Especially in combination with aging, this can become a fundamental problem for employment organizations. The number of sick
reports and burnouts will probably increase further, and people become less productive. Many burnouts are caused by high work pressure in combination with cynicism:
We ‘have’ to work hard but we no longer know why.
People often have to work overtime and on top of this we have to do tasks, such as
filling in forms and doing the administration, which seem useless to us and are often
about organizing trust. The Belgian minister of employment wants to counter this
problem by offering employees more autonomy. However, autonomy might slightly
reduce the stress but the complexity of and the cynicism about the work remains.
After all, this is usually an identity issue and design problem.
The cynicism and the complexity of work will remain, unless we fundamentally innovate our way of organizing. If we do nothing, the complexity, as a result of the
trust paradox, will continue to increase and we still do not give another meaning to
work. To reduce the insecurity within the existing establishment, existing institutions
are expanded or similar institutions are added, which makes the situation even more
complex. The HIVA research shows that the complexity of work has increased by
twelve percent between 1995 and 2015. The rationality, with which we try to reduce
insecurity, starts to reach a level of irrationality and sometimes absurdity and stupidity. We solve complexity with even more complexity. The privacy problem is solved
18 See article in The New York Times Magazine by Rob Walker: 'The Guts of a New Machine'

(30-11-2003).
19 See https://lirias.kuleuven.be/handle/123456789/585820
20 HIVA: Research institute for Employment and society of the University of Leuven Belgium.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

23

with even more IT, laws and procedures, which makes the organizations even more
complex and increases the risk of data leaks. We can no longer deal with this with
the current way of thinking and the current organizational design. We will have to go
back to the drawing board and think about a new organizational design. Thereby we
must see the role of designer much broader. It is not about product design but about
organizational design. We need architects of the future. According to the inventor
Richard Buckminster Fuller, a design is a cross between an artist, an inventor, an
engineer, and objective economist and evolutionary strategist. For us, a designer must
mainly have a wide (see also the aforementioned PESTEP perspective) and deep
(historical) perspective and knowledge of organizational principles and theories.
So, design is not just about how something looks like, but mainly about how it works.
Many management concepts no longer work. And if it does not work in the present,
we must really worry about the future. Many managers and directors still think that
progress can made by implementing small adjustments in the existing system. For
example: sending people on a training course, another IT system, strengthening the
balance sheet of banks or replacing the management. But all these small adjustments
have become a part, whether or not consciously, of a policy of active inertia: we move
a lot, but we make little progress and it seems that we are okay with this. People
become blasé and cynical. Many traditional managers and consultants still genuinely
believe that they are doing it right. They think and act from the believe system that
what they have learned is correct and that experience will show the way.
They do not know another way because the think and decide within the framework
of their nurture, education and experiences. But the days of adjustments to the existing system are over. Usually we try to solve the problems with the same system
and perspective of mind with which they occurred. The existing world is mainly engaged with solving short term and practical problems and not with applying fundamentally new management principles. We improve from K to L, but the total (A up
to L) becomes worse. If you buy a painting, you probably like it otherwise you would
not have bought it. But when you subsequently hang this new painting in an overcrowded living room, it does not necessarily make the room any prettier. This is also
the case when applying management concepts within existing systems. The management concept itself is not the problem, but the system in which it is applied.
We must prepare ourselves for a new reality, a new system and that starts with awareness and a new way of thinking. Most innovations focus on even more jobs, the
improvement of internal processes or the improvement of the competitiveness. But
this will fundamentally change in the coming years, in the coming decades. They are
outdated concepts that insufficiently help us solve the social organizational problems.
We will start to cooperate more and better, not out of weakness, but out of conviction that it is necessary. This gives hope and according to the author Rebecca Solnit,
hope can be found in the assumption that we do not know what will happen and
that this insecurity offers us the space to do something.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

24

Back to the core of organizing
Many people believe that we live in a complex world, but the world is not complex,
people make it complex, that is a different matter. Plants and animals do not suffer
from complexity. A forest simply exists because leaves seek sunlight and roots seek
water. People and organizations unnecessarily make the organization of work complex with positions, departments and companies. Subsequently these intermediaries
are not correctly coordinated and as a result the world becomes even more complex.
In a complex world distrust increases. So, organizing trust creates more distrust. The
only way to escape this trust paradox is to go back to the core of organizing. When
there is one seller and one buyer, we do not need to coordinate a lot. For a one-onone coaching talk we mainly need a diary. But we all know that more specialists are
often required to achieve a goal. These must be aligned, these must be managed.
Organizing work in all cases where there is no 1:1 relationship, contains the following
three components: specializing, coordinating and finalizing, see the schedule below:

Figure 1.3: Core of organizing: supply, demand and coordination between them (S → C → D)

To understand the core of organizing and therefore the core of management, we
have to go back to the question why we organize work. From the first moment that
humans started to organize work, we focused on improving our standard of living.
The predecessor of the Homo Sapiens, the Homo Heidelbergensis, ‘discovered’
about three hundred thousand years ago that giving up a piece of autonomy results
in an increasing revenue per person: smart cooperation provides more food. Even
animals that are much bigger or faster can be caught with the help of specialization,
coordination and finalization. These three components have always been a part of
organizing work. You can coordinate with different tools, such as: management, hierarchies and organizational culture programs. These will now be joined by a new
tool: Blockchain Organizing. With the use of Blockchain Organizing the

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

25

coordination is programmed, so there is very little resistance and therefore the transaction costs will be lower.
From company to network organization
In order to apply Blockchain Organizing correctly, it is important to first transform to
a network organization. It is important to note that your position or organization is
NOT the center of attention, with the stakeholders revolving around it. Neither is it
the center of all the business being carried out. To apply Blockchain Organizing correctly you first have to give up some autonomy, you will have to treat your organization as a hub in a network, a part of a business ecosystem together with your stakeholders such as: customers, suppliers, employees and governments. The transformation takes places step by step, comparable to the development of the assemblyline or internet for example.
This book mainly focuses on the organizational embedding of blockchain technology. In the future leadership will increasingly have to deal with the question: What is
the best way for my organization to start with Blockchain Organizing? In the nineties,
they were asked the question: Should we switch to the internet or not? Now managers are faced with the question: Should we switch to a blockchain or not? There will
be supporters and opponents. According to John Hagel21, co-chairman of Deloitte
Centre for the Edge, large-scale interventions, including the switch to blockchain
technology, will involve two groups: ambassadors and resistors of change. The trick is to
find out who belongs to which group and subsequently, before actually implementing
the large-scale intervention, strengthen the ambassadors and weaken the resistors.
Practice above principles
The word ‘innovation’ is often associated with solving practical problems, creating
product innovations or increasing the turnover. The relation between the system with
which we organize supply and demand, and the management principles on which a
system is based, are often not considered. But choosing practical solutions over principles for too long will ensure that you will have to go further and further back to
take the right path for the future. In the movie ‘Doubt’, Meryl Streep’s character said
it as follows: “Every easy choice today will have its consequence tomorrow.” Changing the DNA
of your organization takes a lot of time and the longer you wait to adapt to new
technologies and management concepts, the harder it will be to survive in the longer
term.
Examples whereby practice was preferred over principles are IT debacles on government level or the choice of Eastman Kodak to postpone the digital camera for ‘a
while’. Usually debacles are not caused by technology, but by the way of organizing
and ignoring the question: which problem do we actually solve with the offered technology? IT debacles are mainly caused by:
▪ the idea that you can manage complexity (automating);
21 American author and consultant, who works for the Deloitte ‘Centre of Edge’.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

26

▪ digitizing analogue processes;
▪ letting your organization drive/lead through technology (supplier);
▪ changing requirements (legislation);
▪ preferring practice over principles;
▪ implementing changing needs of employees and customers on a random basis.
Changing needs are also often caused by the automation paradox. Due to automation, people have less to do while they still have to be present till five o’clock. In the
surplus time they create new needs, they start sending e-mails or writing memos with
which they ‘bother’ other people. So more automation creates not less, but more
work. Many traditional innovations focus on improving the internal processes, reducing costs or differentiation in the market. Usually innovation takes place per company and within a company per department or position. For example, IT and legal
affairs will receive separate assignments to ensure that the organization complies with
the new European privacy law. But the problems that have led to the new privacy
law are much more fundamental. It is mainly the combination of a new reality (digital
society) with an old management model (the firm as superior form to organize supply
and demand with its own websites and databases), that leads to privacy problems.
IT, legal affairs and other positions will have to cooperate smartly to realize a new
design, based on the principle that existing firms or positions within firms don’t have
to continue to exist. We have looked into this real case and used it to describe how
you could setup a blockchain project (see Chapter 5). With most innovations the
company as an organizational format or form is not quickly questioned. The form is
not innovated, there is only innovation within the form. Because there are often
many similarities between organizational problems, a number of organizational principles can be distilled and are further explained in paragraph 2.5. Principles do not
change as often as practical situations. Therefore, when designing an organization, it
is preferred to take principles as a starting point rather than practical problems. Placing current practices over principles as a guideline for change, will make it harder to
adapt to a new fast-changing environment.
Blockchain innovation for existing organizations
Many policy makers, strategists and existing organizations will struggle to make a
paradigm shift and to understand Blockchain Organizing in its purest form. They
will soon find the new organizational technology and organizational form too abstract. This is not because new forms are complex and hard to understand but because policy makers have been conditioned. Many people confuse abstract with being
different from what they are used to or learned. But abstracting literally means: omit
what is not relevant. In addition, politics, also within business, plays an important
role in the resistance of the old establishment. The power of the establishment depends a lot on the survival of old systems in which they have invested. They have
established a network and have entered long term commitments with employees,
customers and suppliers. This offers economies of scale but also has the disadvantage
that traditional organizations cannot adapt as quickly to new technologies as start-

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

27

ups can. Start-ups have the disadvantage that they hardly have a network yet and that
they must establish trust. Most start-ups also have limited financial resources en limited learning experience in innovation processes. Shell, for example, will have difficulty switching to renewable energy, but start-ups have little resources to invest in a
wind farm.
Some companies want to start a new business within the existing company (structure). This idea of creating a ‘new’ company within an existing one has dramatically
failed within the airline industry during the past thirty years when the low-cost carriers were created. This was also a major paradigm shift and large scale intervention.
The real ‘innovators’ were companies like EasyJet, Ryanair and JetBlue. They are not
a spin-off from the traditional airlines like Air France/KLM or Delta Airlines. It
turned out that separating the ‘new’ from the ‘old’ could not be managed.
To break this dilemma, we have to switch to a new form of innovation. Herein there
must be room for a better cooperation between existing organizations and start-ups.
The government can act as a catalyst and launching customer. Many start-ups, also
in the software sector, have been started by people who wanted to improve the
world. But rather quickly they needed more money to grow and the perspective
changed from ‘don’t be evil’ to ‘serve the shareholder’. Just as what happened when
internet developed, many ‘dissenters’ spearheading the development of blockchain,
are quickly becoming ‘corporate executives in suits’. A hybrid form would be ideal
whereby companies, in addition to their existing organization, start a new network
organization (Greenfield Organizing). This new organization starts from scratch,
with design thinking and without the ballast of old systems, interests or obligations.
After the new organization is operational, they can transfer processes from the old
organization step by step. This way, existing companies can renew. They can learn
against acceptable failure costs.
With regard to blockchain innovations, there is still a lot to learn. Innovating in
Blockchain Organizing means that you must discover several times what does not
work before you know what does. The iPhone, as we know it now, was not sent from
the drawing board to the factory in one go. We can no longer solve management
problems insisting on the old frame of mind. We will have to switch to a more fundamental innovation that can no longer be realized by continuously improving the
existing ones. The light bulb, for example, was not 'created' by continuously improving the candle. The light bulb is the result of design thinking: restarting from scratch.
Innovation by Design
Blockchain by Design is a form of Innovation by Design, with design thinking as a
basis. When you are going to change, you usually do not start designing from scratch,
but you adjust an existing design. When you are going to renew, you usually start
from the foundations and drawing table with a new design. Blockchain Organizing
is building something new. We design new network organizations or business ecosystems and transfer existing processes to this new construction. Improving existing

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

28

processes is mainly useful when, besides efficiency improvement, the focus is on
‘preparing’ processes so they can later be transferred to a new blockchain organization. With the transition from company to network organization you must take into
account the old interest and forces or, as formulated by Thomas Friedman: “If horses
could have voted, there never would have been cars”. You can read more about the transition
from existing organizations to new blockchain organizations in Chapter 5.
In the next paragraphs we will further discuss what Blockchain Organizing actually
is and what it can or cannot do for your organization. The organizational aspect of
Blockchain Organizing is further explained in Chapter 2, the technical aspect and
Chapter 3. The problems that can be solved with Blockchain Organizing will be further explained in paragraph 4.1.
1.4 Some concepts
Blockchain Organizing could be placed in a logical order between Weconomics (as a
form of New Organizing) and blockchain technology. For a quicker insight it is useful to explain a few concepts in more detail. Because the topicality of blockchain
technology can overtake us quickly, we will limit ourselves to a more general description of a concept. For an up to date overview we refer you to our Knowledge Centre
Blockchain Organizing22.
See Figure 1.4, The Blockchain iceberg. There is a logical order between the concepts
shown. Only the tip of the iceberg is visible. What we see is the daily application and
specification or operation of the technology (like Bitcoin). The further we go below
the surface, the more abstract and general it becomes. Bitcoin is part of cryptocurrency, cryptocurrency is part of the blockchain etcetera.

Figure 1.4: ‘The blockchain iceberg’

Bitcoin

22 See also the websites: weconet.org/block

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

29

Bitcoin is a digital currency and can be seen as the first, long-term, workable application of blockchain technology. The visible development of Bitcoin started with the
publication of a whitepaper23 by Satoshi Nakamoto24. A blockchain is a distributed
network of nodes (participants). The challenge with distributed system is the sequence of transactions, because there is not a central unit that determines this. Within
the Bitcoin protocol, a block is a collection of transactions that, logically, took place
at the same moment. A block is added to the chain of existing blocks (blockchain)
by miners25 every ten minutes.

Figure 1.5: A blockchain is a collection of blocks and a block is a collection of transactions with
the same timestamp. It is impossible that transaction A→A and A→B will be sequenced in same
block because they use the same input-reference (no double spending).

Within the Bitcoin protocol, a transaction included in a block can no longer be
changed26. A transaction is transferring a value (bitcoin) from seller to buyer. Hereby
the protocol ensures that the seller actually has this value and can only spend it once.
Transactions are recorded in a decentralized accounting system and are distributed
across the participating nodes27 of the network.
Cryptocurrency
Currency literally means medium of exchange. Cryptography is a field of expertise
that has been conducting research into the encryption of values and messages with
the use of processors for over forty years, in order to prevent unauthorized third
23 Satoshi Nakamoto: ‘Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System’.
24 A pseudonym for a hitherto unknown person or group of persons.

25 A miner can add a block to the blockchain by being ‘the first person’ to solve a difficult puzzle.

When a miner adds a block, he receives bitcoins.
26 In 2016 two components related to Bitcoin and Ethereum were hacked. After this, a discussion
arose in both communities on how to solve this. Ethereum (The DAO), has chosen a hard-fork
(a split), so the (future) history can be changed.
27 A node within a (computer) network is a computer or other device that is connected to a certain network. The node can have an own identity (for instance an IP address). The node can run
software and therefore contribute to the operation of the network.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

30

parties from reading a message. For over twenty years cryptocurrency has been using
cryptography when moving money from seller to buyer. Cryptocurrency can be regarded as programmable money. Hereby the seller, for instance a healthcare insurer,
can characterize a cash payment in such a way that this money can only be spend on
a healthcare provider.
Blockchain
A blockchain is a distributed database that records the continuously growing and
non-mutable ‘administration system’ of transactions, that are arranged in blocks and
whereby the network will find consensus on a shared reality. This creates a way to
organize trust without the complexity having to increase. A blockchain facilitates the
secure execution of digital transactions. The underlying technology to make this possible can be called blockchain technology. The most famous and longest running
application is Bitcoin. When we use blockchain technology with a fundamentally new
organizational model, a disruptive management concept is created. For the first time
in a hundred years a management technology is actually reinvented.
A blockchain is created because a new block is constantly added to an existing chain.
Hereby a reference is always made to the previous block. A blockchain is safe and
unchangeable ‘by design’. A block is a collection of transactions that have taken place
‘at the same time’. Because transactions distribute themselves across all nodes of the
network, not every node receives a certain transaction at the same time. To solve that
problem, blocks are mined and added to the chain. Once a transaction is included in
the chain (with a previous and next block) it can no longer leave the chain. You
cannot mutate a blockchain28. The integrity of a blockchain is only guaranteed when
all users check the transactions on this chain and at least half of the users are honest
(not trying to spend a value, an input, more than once).
Blockchain technology
Blockchain technology is the underlying technology of Bitcoin. Blockchain technology is used within Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT)29. This is a technology to
maintain a distributed administration system. DLT is again part of a wider field of
expertise: organizational technology. This is a technology to organize demand and
supply in a smarter way by reducing insecurity without increasing the complexity.
Insecurity is reduced by validating transactions, by recording these in a non-mutable
way and using this information for a next transaction and to create a shared reality.
Blockchain technology is a technology to check, validate and add transactions to the
administration system that is on every full node of the network. Each computer that
is connected to the Bitcoin network is a node. A full node is a node that fully executes
all the rules of the protocol. Full nodes download all transactions made, in other
28 That is not completely true. A hard-fork is an adjustment in the Bitcoin protocol that makes it

possible to validate previous invalid blocks or transactions. Therefore, each node must be upgraded. A second chain is created whereby nodes that have not downloaded an upgrade are not
included in the new chain.
29 An example of DLT that is not a blockchain is Hashgraph.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

31

words, the complete administration system. An administration system is literally
keeping track of:
▪ how much value you have now
▪ when sending: what is deducted and what are you left with afterwards
▪ when receiving: what is added and how much have you got afterwards
Blockchain Organizing
Blockchain Organizing is a management concept that primarily takes an organization
problem and design as the starting point and not the technology. It answers the question how you can organize demand and supply as efficiently as possible. Blockchain
Organizing is a new management concept whereby your design is not based on existing ‘buildings’, for example companies, traditional markets and central governments, but on the organizational capacity within the smallest building blocks: man
and resource. Smallest building blocks have values. A value must exist and you must
be able to record its characteristics (facts, attributes). A value can transfer (flow) from
seller to buyer. As soon as a transaction has taken place and is validated by the network, it is irreversibly recorded in a chain (the blockchain). This creates a single
source or reality whereby you do not have to trust anyone, only the entire network
including the protocol.
As this book is based on organizing work, we mainly look at what Blockchain Organizing means for the domain of HR, management and employment organizations.
Blockchain Organizing used in employment organizations is based on task performance whereby people and resources are connected to a demand via coordinating
capacity. For example, currently it is widely assumed that managers, development
programs and hierarchies as coordinating capacities are essential, but that does not
have to be the case. Traditional organizing is especially suitable for the production
and consumption of physical goods via traditional markets and companies in a stable
environment. Blockchain Organizing on the other hand is especially suitable for the
production, storage, transport, repacking and consumption of digital values30. It
makes information and knowledge workers more productive. Or as Peter Drucker
describes it in his book de ‘Post-Capitalist Society’ (1993): “It is time to develop a
model that supports the growth of productivity of knowledge workers.”
Weconomics
Weconomics is a socio-economic mental legacy, a body of thoughts, accommodated
in the Weconomics Foundation. Weconomics facilitates the transition to a more sustainable welfare. It is a network of pioneers who independently and jointly contribute
to the sustainability of our welfare. The core of this is the development and deployment of new management concepts based on organizational technology such as
blockchain. The Foundation is a commonality and helps start-ups, entrepreneurs,
30 Digital values are digital products and services such as an e-book or paid newspaper article via

internet, but also information about products and services (for instance price, delivery time, suppliers).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

32

intrapreneurs and organizations, from idea to implementation. Weconomics is a fundamentally new organization model, an infrastructure and a validated transition program.
The above are the most important concepts needed for the purpose of this book.
Next we are going to answer the question: What is Blockchain Organizing?
1.5 What is Blockchain Organizing?
Blockchain Organizing is a new management concept. It is a combination of blockchain technology and the Weconomics organizational model31. Blockchain Organizing makes it possible to organize demand and supply against the lowest transaction
costs. It is a concept whereby a design is not based on the company or traditional
market as coordinating capacity, but on the smallest building blocks (human and resource, demand and supply), and the basics organizing principles. A blockchain protocol is the coordinating capacity between supply and demand. It is based on task
performance whereby humans and resources (Supply) are connected to a finalization
(Demand) via coordinating capacity (Coordination). In this book we also present a
value flow (see also figure 1.3) as:
Supply (S) → Coordinate (C) → Demand (D)
Conventional organizing is especially suitable for the production and consumption
of physical goods via traditional firms in a stable environment. As we saw earlier:
Blockchain Organizing is especially suitable for the production, storage, transport,
repacking and consumption of digital values. From an organizational point of view,
blockchain can be seen as an additional layer to the internet. Internet makes it possible to share information without almost any friction. Blockchain makes it possible
to execute transactions without any friction. Therefore, we also call this a value, trustor transaction-network.
We talk about THE blockchain and THE internet while these actually do not exist.
Internet is a network of connected nodes with an IP address that can exchange data
(values) with each other via a protocol (TCP/IP) and connections. Blockchain technology uses internet and is therefore also a distributed network of nodes. Non-fraudulent nodes benefit if the ‘accounting’ system is correct. This means that the nodes
(whether or not against remuneration) want to cooperate when checking and validating transactions.
The principle of the Bitcoin protocol relies on the fact that more than half of the
network computer power is required in order to commit fraud. Within Bitcoin a node
can include both wallet software as well as miner software. Special mathematical
31 For a detailed description of the Weconomics organizational model, see chapter 5 of the

Weconomics theory book.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

33

functions protect every part of the system including sending and receiving bitcoins.
Within Bitcoin a blockchain is actually and literally a chain of blocks, whereby a block
is a collection of bitcoin payments that logically take place at ‘the same moment’.
Meanwhile there is not one blockchain or chain, but there are several, whether or not
private, also called permissioned blockchains, public, also called permissionless, or
more hybrid forms.
We know the blockchain concept especially in relation to Bitcoin. Blockchain technology became best known after the publication of the whitepaper by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008. Just as internet and the World Wide Web did not just fall from the
sky32, Bitcoin and blockchain technology were created by further development of
existing insights. Nakamoto’s work continues to develop based on the knowledge of
others. Bitcoin is mainly a form of cryptocurrency33. A format of value that no longer
includes cash or giro money but software code. For instance, it allows recording of
rules that housing benefits may only be spent on rent.
So, it is possible to program money. In addition, Bitcoin does not have any central
authority, like large national banks, but it is a form of distributed authority with a
single source or reality. The essence of Bitcoin, blockchain technology as well as
Blockchain Organizing is the recording (profiling) of a value with the seller, the selection of the value through the buyer and the transaction between seller and buyer.
Value flows from sender to receiver and the protocol is the coordinating capacity
that reduces insecurity and organizes trust. Specific algorithms and encryptions are
used to make the connection meaningful, secure and reliable.
Blockchain Organizing integrates ideas and concepts like community, platform and
sharing economy, peering, content sharing, digitization, democratization of internet,
crown funding, crowd sourcing, cloud computing, social media and open innovation.
Blockchain Organizing provides a new perspective on positions and concepts such
as freedom, shared reality, fact and fiction, non-commitment, avoidance and evasion,
decentralization, accountability, trust, value, trade and economy. It ensures that you
can smartly cooperate with both your colleagues as well as your environment (portfolio workers34, customers, suppliers and talents) in the same way. It provides an
effective policy with regards to the organization of fixed, flex and more hybrid positions or projects. This would be no problem within Blockchain Organizing because
it works with type connections (loose, fixed, definite period, indefinite period), smart
contracts and prior consensus. Blockchain Organizing is especially suitable for digital

32 See also the Weconomics practice book, paragraph 3.4: ‘Weconomics and the World Wide

Web’.
33 The word ‘currency’ is derived from the Middle English ‘curraunt’ which means ‘in circulation’.
Currency is a medium of exchange and therefore not just money. In general money has the function of medium of exchange, calculation unit and is a way to store value.
34 Portfolio worker: collective name for freelancers, flex workers, self-employed people, hybrid
workers, etcetera.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

34

production and consumption and will make information- and knowledge workers 35
much more productive.
For managers it is important to understand a number of relevant organizational principles of blockchain technology, to further explore these and consider what you can
do with it. What are the principles of blockchain technology and how can you implement those? The question is how blockchain technology can contribute to organizing
trust and solving paradoxes like the trust-, automation- and productivity paradox.
Some key organizational principles of Blockchain Organizing are:
1. It is based on values (smallest building block) and transactions (connections between blocks).
2. Panta Rei: value flows and you cannot make the same transaction twice.
3. Seller must prove that he is the owner of a value.
4. It is impossible to spend a value more than once.
5. It is a neutral, distributed network with peer-to-peer connections.
6. It works with a community governance model.
7. Open source as much as possible, without exclusion and without (country or
company) boundaries.
8. There are less traditional trusted third parties in order to reduce insecurity.
9. Transactions can be performed through an appropriate encryption, with an acceptable security level, the transport from supply to demand is secure.
10. The person who contributes to the community also benefits, for example with of
tokens. The value that is registered (for example number of bitcoins), must be
the same as, or without fiat/non-transparent medium of exchange, be exchangeable with, the value that the miners receive for their validation work. If that is not
the case, a central position is needed that issues these values. This party can exercise control by rewarding selectively. The reward mechanism must be included
in the blockchain protocol.
The next question to be addressed is: how can you apply Blockchain Organizing
effectively within your organization?
1.6 Blockchain within your organization?
More and more organizations ask for useful applications of Blockchain Organizing
within their own organization. But to put it bluntly: these are actually not available,
unless you see internal transaction (interactions) as transactions, your organization as
a collection of smallest building stones or unless you find consensus with your stakeholders. You can start Blockchain Organizing from your own organization, but you
35 Information workers: collective name for people who are fully or partially involved in or asso-

ciated with the processing of data into information, from information to knowledge and from
knowledge to wisdom. Collective name for office workers, data processors, information processors, knowledge workers, service providers or service workers whereby secondary processes include the processing of data or information (planning, coordinating, communicating, sharing information, etcetera).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

35

have to find other parties to cooperate with because normally within organizations
we don’t ‘see’ transactions. You don’t bill a colleague for attending a meeting for
example.
A blockchain within a company is like an assembly line within a craft. It is not just
about technology, but mainly about the problem that you want to solve and the organizational model in which we use the technology. If you start with blockchain
within your own organization there is a risk that it will lead a life of its own. Compare
it with setting up an internal communication systems based on the internet protocol
(TCP/IP) at the beginning of the nineties. After years of investments, organizations
no longer fundamentally adjust these systems. The result is that we now share data,
information and knowledge in an outdated way, by sending e-mails to each other and
by coping data in our own systems.
Blockchain checklist
In general, there are no transactions within organizations in the traditional meaning
of the word. Normally, no invoice is sent when you call a colleague for advice. This
means that you have to look at possible applications within your business ecosystem.
For instance with your employees (like employment contracts on a blockchain) and
your suppliers (purchase orders and invoices on a blockchain). To test if Blockchain
Organizing is useful for your organization you can ask a number of questions. These
questions should primarily focus on the situation where you want to apply Blockchain Organizing within your own organization in relation to some suppliers.
Your ‘own’ blockchain could, for instance, be used for transactions with some of
your suppliers. We advise not to start with core-suppliers or core-processes but HRtransaction for example. HR-instruments such as: courses or assessment products.
We also advise to start with your suppliers and not your customers. Usually your
customers will choose a solution themselves unless you consult with them about
smart cooperating within ecosystems.
Let’s assume that you want to set up a blockchain with some of your suppliers. You
(always) will have to execute the following four basic processes that you require with
value transactions:
1. profiling (what do your suppliers offer)
2. selecting (how can your organization select the offer of your suppliers)
3. purchasing (value flows from supplier to your organization)
4. paying (money flows from your organization to supplier)
To assess if it is useful to set up your own blockchain with a number of suppliers,
there are a few questions to ask yourself. The more questions are answered with ‘yes’,
the greater the chance that a blockchain can add something to your business:
1. We want to improve the productivity in the supply chain (aggregated productivity). First of all, we look at processes whereby we can cooperate with our suppliers.
We look for the commonalities in our processes and solve the differences locally.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

36

2. We do not know all our suppliers and we cannot trust them completely. Therefore,
we need purchase conditions and contracts.
3. We must find consensus if and when a transaction has taken place.
4. We require a digital accounting system where both suppliers and our own employees must add, check and record transactions.
5. We need our employees and suppliers to check and validate the transactions of
others and we are also prepared to ‘pay’ for this.
6. We do not need (full) control over the execution of transactions, the protocol with
which we execute them or the accounting system in which we record and check
them. If a participant in the ecosystem wants to adjust the software, other participants can mutually decide, for example by consensus or by majority.
7. If the software is not running correctly, an error emerge, the system fails or is
hacked, we do not need to have full control over this and participants can decide
how they will handle this.
8. We want to make certain transaction information is publicly available to those
with the right access rights.
9. There is sufficient knowledge and experience with employees/suppliers in terms
of blockchain technology and its components such as: cryptography, database
technology, network complexity, game theory, distributed networks and digital
currencies. We might hire people for this, we know the blockchain market.
We think that it is unlikely that you will be able to answer ‘yes’ to most questions and
this example is only about your connection with a number of your suppliers. To
apply Blockchain Organizing in a useful way you have to give up some autonomy
and to look at cases where you could apply blockchain technology with your stakeholders: your customers, suppliers, staff, governments and non-governmental organizations. Together they are a business ecosystem or shared information- and transaction network. Blockchain Organizing is much more useful for this. You start your
ecosystem with ‘growing’ awareness, your starting point should be that you want to
apply Blockchain Organizing on an equal basis and that you want to improve productivity not only for your own organization, but also for the total supply chain. Don’t’
think that the world turns around you. In a blockchain community a buyer for example does not have more power than a supplier when stipulating how transactions
must be executed.
A major problem in developing insights and answering questions related to blockchain is not so much the technology but the conditioning (actually framed idea) that
we would require companies and governments to organize trust, work, commonalities and economies. As formulated by Noble price winner Elinor Ostrom: “There is
no reason to believe that bureaucrats and politicians, no matter how well meaning, are better at
solving problems than the people on the spot, who have the strongest incentive to get the solution
right.”
Many organizations managers find it hard to imagine that ‘their’ superior management model (the firm with a hierarchy) can become redundant. They will have to let

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

37

go of the idea that they are the center of doing business. Just as the sun and stars do
not revolve around the earth, neither does the world revolve around your organization or position. Many organizations and officials suffer from position centrism, in
other words: making you position or organization the reference point for everyone
else. Those days are over. It makes little sense to set up your own blockchain. A
central blockchain is a ‘contradictio in terminis’. You are not going to innovate cars
to subsequently have them pulled by horses.
Blockchain will only come alive if you let go of the current unit of analysis and organizational design and you go back to the smallest building blocks and organizational principles. If we are smart, we will change the organizing capacity at the same
time. ‘The firm’ is only a form of organizing capacity. It is a form that we still have
to deal with for a while, but that eventually will largely disappear because it is becoming the most expensive form of Organizing. We see the average ‘life expectancy’ of
companies drop from 60 years in the 1950s to 20 years now. In addition, net jobs are
almost only created in companies that are less than five years old. Organizational
forms are already changing. “The organization of the future might be ten million people who
get together (online) for ten minutes, solve a problem and then go separate ways”, as formulated
by the management consultant Esko Kilpi
Transaction costs within companies?
Many managers still believe that the company is the superior form to organize supply
and demand of work in a digital era. This image is probably based on the wrong
assumption that there are no transaction costs within companies. But these costs are
definitely there if we no longer take the company but man as the smallest unit of
analysis and design. With an automation project you can take a department or company as design unit. Or you can take the smallest organizational building block: human and resources, as building block and build you ecosystem by connecting humans
to resources and supply to demand. Within Blockchain Organizing man is the smallest building block and the world is the largest building. Everything in between moves
by switching connections on and off.
To apply Blockchain Organizing in a useful way, we must look at the application of
blockchain technology within business ecosystems. Blockchain Organizing makes
more sense for shared information- and transaction networks than for individual organizations. The implementation of blockchain technology starts with companies
that want to transform from a traditional company to a network organization. Managers can provide an important contribution to this transition, both in a positive and
negative sense. Blockchain will bring little change if we do not change the management model simultaneously and focus ourselves on real social organizational problems.
Blockchain Organizing, and the principles on which it is based, still has a long way
to go before it becomes self-evident for organizations. Many people still find it too
abstract and too complicated, but that has more to do with the degree to which they

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

38

are conditioned than with the complexity of the concept. You can only oversee the
whole picture by going back to the core. Something new starts with letting go of the
old. Blockchain Organizing is actually very simple, because it is based on a limited
number of organizational principles. These principles can be applied almost everywhere. The best chefs prepare food with principles and use recipes. Organizational
science does not have a recipe for the solution of every local management issue, but
it does have principles. With the knowledge and experience of the right organizational experts most organizational problems, also the major ones, can be solved.
This was an introduction in Blockchain Organizing. We now continue by taking a
closer look at the organizational aspect of Blockchain Organizing. In chapter 3 the
technical aspect is explained in more detail.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

39

2. Blockchain as organizational concept
You might not realize it but you are constantly organizing. Even when you are asleep,
your brain is trying to recover. It is organizing itself so it can perform again the following day. The word organizing is derived from the Greek word ‘organon’ that
means tool or instrument. Historically, these were mainly physical tools, such as the
plough. Organizing is applying or using tools to achieve a target. Apart from physical
tools, ‘organizing’ nowadays mainly refers to applying knowledge and for example
ideas, concepts and methods. The word ‘organon’ also means ‘organ’. An organ is a
subordinate group in a greater total. An organization is a tool that must have a position in the total picture, otherwise it should not be there.
A synonym for the word ‘organizing’ is ‘completing’ or ‘managing’. This has to do
with the purpose of organizing (finalizing). Organizing is a targeted activity that must
lead somewhere. This meaning is more on the demand side. Another synonym for
organizing is: ‘providing’. This meaning is more on the supply side of organizing.
This means that organizing is aimed at converting input into output, or as indicated
before: aligning demand and supply. The capacity that does this with the least friction, or the lowest transaction costs, has the best chance to survive. Organizing is
the total of specializing (supply), coordinating and finalizing (demand). Blockchain
Organizing is a coordinating capacity with (in theory) lower transaction costs than
traditional forms such as the company or the hierarchy.
The word ‘organization’ derived from organizing has two meanings: a ‘fiscal-legal
entity’ and ‘organizing capacity’. IBM for example is an organization and IBM has
organizing capacity. Especially the second meaning is important for the purpose of
this book. Your brain has a certain organizing capacity to repair cells. In this book
we look at the emerging blockchain technology in the context of its organizing capacity. First at the demand side: how can this technology help us solve a number of
organizational problems? Secondly at its ‘coordinating capacity’ between supply and
demand and finally at the supply side: which techniques, specializations and concepts
will help to solve problems. We mainly see Blockchain Organizing as an organizing
capacity to help solve management problems and therefore social issues.
In these dynamic times, with major changes and social challenges, putting more focus
on organizing capacity, and therefore organizational science as a field of expertise, is
not an unnecessary luxury. During these stormy times, we can use some higher organizational science and ‘organizational vitamins’ in education, healthcare, safety,
business and politics. Blockchain Organizing best finds its way in a new context,
where old principles and traditional management concepts no longer work. We live
in a time where data, information and knowledge have become the most important
production factors. We now have a technology at our disposal to put people back at
the center and to realize and share a better reality together. But still, despite the presence of better technology, we find it more and more difficult to organize trust and

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

40

for example make a distinction between facts and fiction. Plus, the power of large
companies and central governments is increasing and it becomes more and more
difficult to assure privacy.
We believe that a renewed vision of how we organize our information society is in
order. We are mainly talking about organizing trust, work and economy as basis for
our welfare. When we look more fundamentally at the underlying principles with
which we organize our digital society, we see that most organizational forms still go
back to the beginning of the twentieth century, for instance ‘the factory’. They are
especially suitable for physical production in large quantities and a relatively stable
local market. Traditionally we organize supply and demand with ‘the firm’ (or hierarchy), ‘the market’ and ‘the government’36 as forms of coordinating capacity. Hereby
the firm or government can decide to outsource a certain process via the market, but
after sourcing out, the process is again performed via a firm. Often the firm is better
scalable and more transparent, but less flexible while outsourcing via the market is
flexible, but often less scalable and transparent. Firms and markets often work more
efficiently than the government, but more often lead to inequality.
In the context of the twenty-first century we need more hybrid organizational forms
that are scalable, flexible and transparent at the same time. We need to find forms
that can better organize trust and that find a greater balance between competing and
cooperating, between part and total. Forms with a new social economic order that
reason from man needs and not from the supply side or existing business models.
Forms that do not take permanent jobs, structures and business cultures as principle,
but human demand and the pursuit of happiness and welfare.
Blockchain Organizing makes cooperation between firm, market and government
much simpler because it reasons from the organizational problem that must be
solved, from the smallest building blocks and organizational principles. Blockchain
Organizing is an organizational model with a new unit of thinking. We work from a
stratification (taxonomy) whereby changes at a higher level do not affect the lower
levels. Blockchain Organizing reasons from the smallest building block: human and
resource (supply, ontology) and connect this to a question or problem that you cannot solve by yourself. The unit of analysis and design is: coordinating capacity. This
is the meaningful connection between supply and demand. Together they constitute
an organizing capacity.
In this chapter we further elaborate on the basis of Blockchain Organizing: organizing trust and allowing values to flow as efficient as possible, based on five organizational principles or foundations that are applicable to any organization. We also
36 The firm, the market, the bank or the government do not exist. When this book states the firm

(or the market, the bank, the government) one should actually read ‘the firm’, whereby ‘the firm’
should be understood as an institution or a form, a way of organizing or as some kind or organizing capacity.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

41

further explain the question what we mean by ‘Old’ and ‘New’ Organizing. But we
start with the basis: trust and the organization of trust.
2.1 Context: digitalization
We believe that everything that can be digitized will be digitized eventually. And the
pace at which the real physical world will be digitized will accelerate, or as the Canadian prime-minster Justin Trudeau formulated it: “The pace of change has never been this
fast, and yet it will never be this slow again.” Your physical house is ‘no longer’ relevant in
a transaction between house seller and buyer. Instead of the physical good, the digital
ownership claim, registered within the land register is important. And digital ownership claims are just bits and bytes that can be transported in a ‘blockchain way’. That
means: authentication of seller and buyer, secure transport between seller and buyer,
the seller has to prove ownership and the seller can only sell it once. And when you
need more independent actors to validate transactions, a distributed system can be
the solution to reach consensus. Within the digital transformation, data, and especially the way we organize supply and demand of data, will be important. The first
cars that were made were laughed at by people who used horses and wagons. The
roads were made for horses, not for cars. Cars got stuck in the muddy roads that
were made for horses. This metaphor illustrates that with the technology change
(from horse to car), the infrastructure to organize supply and demand, should also
change, otherwise it doesn’t make any sense.
The European Commission37 expects that the number of people working in the data
market will grow from 6.16 million in 2016 up to 10.43 million by 2020 and the
number of data organizations from 255,000 to 359,050. That’s almost a doubling in
five to six years. Revenues will more than double from €300 billion to €739 billion.
They define data workers as: workers, who collect, store, manage and/or analyze,
interpret and visualize data. The pace of the digital transformation will continue to
accelerate and so do the problems that will originate when applying new technologies
in old organization models without attempting to change behavior. Most digital strategies in traditional organizations don’t reflect how digital is changing our social economic order and management as an innovation. We see organization costs (management and staff) increase and transaction cost decrease. When transaction costs go to
zero, interactions (internal transaction) within companies become transactions and
can be executed more efficiently with Blockchain Organizing. In that case, hierarchies will become markets and traditional organizations will become irrelevant and
eventually obsolete.
Most suppliers of IT- and consultancy services have old ‘firm-DNA’. They have customer complexity at the core of their revenue model. They benefit more from
37 See also ‘European data market study’ on https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-mar-

ket/en/news/final-results-european-data-market-study-measuring-size-and-trends-eu-data-economy

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

42

complex than from simple situations. They mainly see the differences but forget that
there are more similarities at the core of digitalization. Every value (products and
services) can be translated into bits and bytes and can be transported from supply to
demand in the ‘same’ way. If you take a closer look at the development of cloud
computing for example you see a slow adaption. Cloudcomputing is not mainstream,
most people still use e-mails with attachments to share information. You could see
cloud computing as a predecessor of blockchain (see also Leslie Lamport and the
concept of ‘Distributed systems’ in paragraph 3.1).
Because of the ‘firm-DNA’, there are so many applications that don’t have ‘the cloud’
as unity of thinking and design. This makes it is almost impossible to migrate processes into the cloud. Despite the many advantages such as: lower costs, efficiencies,
speed, privacy protection and transparency, the adaption is at a very slow pace, compared to the technological opportunities. For real digitalization you need a transition
program and a new organization model that is industry agnostic with one basis in an
ontology and a taxonomy, comparable with one electricity grid. For a modern ITlandscape you don’t need a database per company, you only need access to attributes
to execute processes. Just as an electronic device in your house ‘translates’ electricity
into motion, our sound, an IT-application translates data into information, or better
gives answers to questions.

Figure 2.1: From power grid to ontology, feeding different applications

Leslie Lamport already developed the fundamentals for cloud computing in 1976. So
the first step in your digital transformation is not a new technology, the first step is
finding consensus about the problem you want to solve. The second step is to design
and develop a new organization model that can change the way you process interactions and transactions. Start your project with identifying your stakeholders: market
parties, facilitators, providers, governments, etcetera. The development of shared
transaction centers is a big challenge, not that much from a technologically perspective, but from a social cultural one. Again we suffer from leadership legacy instead
of technology legacy.
To put digital transformation in place you should start thinking about the ten core
connections for communities we will explain later in this book (see also figure 2.6).
It is not a proof of wisdom when you put Blockchain Organizing in bilateral

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

43

relationships between customers and suppliers. You need to think of and develop
collective value chains with no single point of failure but with a consensus mechanism between the different actors which are equal in the way they process transactions. Giving up some autonomy is much more difficult than integrating new technologies into you existing organization model.
When management - as we know it and still use it - was invented in the beginning of
the twentieth century, organizations were almost entirely managing physical flows
and trying to adjust capricious people to the assembly line. In recent decades,
knowledge work, self-organizing and the information and therefore data component
has become more and more important. This was due to a changing contexts and
available database technologies, internet, and in the last few years due to blockchain
technology. All physical and human values can be converted into bits and bytes. As
a result of this digital transformation, physical flows can be performed much more
efficiently and we will become less depending on the separated parts of supply chains.
We can imagine that the siloization of knowledge stops and becomes wisdom. Old
siloized organizations become part of an internet assembly line. But most digital
strategies from organizations we researched, trained or advised do not reflect how a
digital transformation will change information systems, leadership, management and
our social economic order. In particular, analog processes are digitized. We call that
automation and not digitalization. Most organizations are still hunters and collectors
if it comes to data. Most of the energy we put in digitalization still didn’t create an
assembly line of data processors. The big question is: will blockchain change this?
Digitalization is the process of converting analog information, into a digital format
with a new organization model. For example: a physical book that can be read with
an e-reader and distributed online directly between writer and reader. Or the characteristics and transactions of an employee, that can be stored in a Personal Data Service, connected to a Blockchain As A Service for example. Digitalization also converts analog processes into digital processes. Digital processes transport, store and
retrieve data in a much faster, cheaper and trustworthy way than old models do. This
opens the possibility to change processes not only within organizations, but especially between them. Organization costs of traditional firms keep rising while transaction costs will go to zero. This means that the generally considered superior form
to organize trust, work and economy will not remain 'the company' and 'the government' and thus 'the traditional market' between them, but will be replaced by shared
information and transaction networks.
Digital transformation requires new and above all authentic leadership. A digital
leader is not someone who knows everything about automation, about soft- and
hardware, but knows what technology means for humans and how it can help us to
pursue prosperity, welfare and happiness. In addition to automation, we need new
organizational models such as Weconomics and a change of behavior. We don’t see
that behavior is changed by technology in crypto trade markets and their derivatives,

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

44

for example. It looks like we are heading towards a new ‘2008-crisis’. An important
advantage of Blockchain Organizing is that the model is industry agnostic. This
makes the world much less complex. In order to achieve this, at least two conditions
must be met: authentic digital leadership and letting go of existing contexts (industries, sectors, organizations and jobs).
Western countries are developing from an industrial economy to a data economy.
This digital transformation has far-reaching consequences for existing organizations,
forms and leadership. We are in a transition period where physical buildings are replaced with 'data warehouses’ and physical flows become relatively less important
compared to data flows. If we organize this new context well, we will become more
productive and solve privacy and security issues. We will become less dependent on
big data companies and we can deal with fakenews and fakework in a better way.
With Blockchain Organizing it is possible that (IT) technology finally makes us more
productive and produces surpluses to organize a more sustainable prosperity.
We can conclude that we are in a transition from a physical to a digital society, or as
we sometimes put it: “Our world is undergoing a global digital transformation where digital and
the physical reality are blurring into a single integrated modern way of living. This new world does
not only need new organization technology such as blockchain, but especially needs new organization
models to organize supply and demand of data”. But we can also learn from the physical
world. Although data and data processes have other characteristics as physical products or processes, some characteristics are the same. We can learn from the ‘old
world’ how we should organize (or should not organize) supply and demand. For
example we could learn from risk & compliance processes in order to organize privacy. Organization should take care of data and privacy in a similar way as they take
care of money in an organization. A lot of effort is put in processes to assure that
money is only spend when there is a budget, or the proper function in an organization
has access to budgets or can transfer money etcetera.
2.2 Basis: trust, values and transactions
The core of Blockchain Organizing includes a number of concepts that are essential
in understanding and using this new management concept:
▪ Trust: in order to do business with each other, you must trust each other. When
you do not know each other personally and you cannot seal transactions with a
handshake, you need institutions such as money and contracts. These institutions
have been doing their job correctly for a long time. However now they become
too expensive because they make the world unnecessarily complex. We can also
program trust. A blockchain protocol ensures that you do not have to trust anyone
only the entire network, or as formulated by Pavel Kravchenko38: “Blockchain a
mechanism for reaching consensus regarding the state of a shared database between multiple

38 Founder of Distributed Labs, blockchain expert, teacher and speaker.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

45

parties who don’t trust each other”. In fact, it is a mechanism for finding consensus on
a shared reality as the basis for trust.
▪ Value: a resource has value when a person assigns it a certain value and when it
can be recognized and distinguished from other values via attributes (such as
color, price or supplier). A tree in the desert is for example ‘nature’ and has no
economic value for a person, till someone decides to charge ten euros per hour to
sit in the shade of that tree. Then you start to assign attributes to the tree (who is
the owner, how much does it cost to sit in the shade for an hour, etcetera). When
a value is initially placed in a blockchain we call this an ‘Oracle’. In addition to the
value of a physical product or a service itself, the information (collection of attributes) of a product or service also has a certain value and can be exchanged for
money. The data that you generate at home (CO2 emission, fuel consumption,
number of hours that the light is on, etcetera), or from your body (Fitbit), your
car or DNA-profile can have a certain value. Data from your house and can be
sold to a utility supplier for example.
▪ Transaction (Flow): takes place when value transfers from seller to buyer. Another
word for transaction is value flows. Usually there is a purchase (an order, for example the delivery of a book from Ben → Ann) and a payment (the delivery of 10
bitcoin, for example, from Ann → Ben)39.

Figure 2.2: Example of a transaction: two value flows (purchase and payment)

39 When we explain a transaction in this book we often use as payment: from Ann → Ben (abbre-

viated to A→B) and as purchase (for example delivery book): from Ben →Ann (abbreviated to
B→A). It can differ per situation whether first the purchase is made and then the payment, vice
versa or simultaneously. Usually we only use the word transaction in this book if we mean a purchase and an associated payment. In addition, 10 Bitcoin is a lot for a book, but it is just an example.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

46

Organizing is about allowing value to flow as frictionless as possible from someone
who has it (the seller) to someone who wants it (the buyer)40. The most ideal form
for this, is the one that provides the least friction. The same applies to 41 the flow of
water from high to low, whereby water seeks the path with the least resistance. Electricity goes from plus to minus and gas flows from high pressure to low pressure.
This book is about allowing values to flow as frictionless as possible from supply to
demand. This is the core of organizing! We also call this flow of values ‘value flows’.
What many people seem to forget is that ‘asking’ a questions and receiving an answer
between two systems can also be seen as a value flow. This enables us to organize
information systems fundamentally different with concepts such as Bring Your Own
Data.
Four essential processes
As we saw before in the example of the three in the desert, an object gets an economic value as soon as it has value for a person, or can be connected to a person. It
must be possible to further describe a value in characteristics (also called ‘tagging’).
Within organizational design and IT architecture we usually call these attributes. A
car is a value and has a number of characteristics, such as color, weight and make.
Based on these characteristics a value can be offered, distinguished, found, delivered
and paid for. This transaction can also be registered in an accounting system based
on attributes, or for example with the tax office. The four main processes with Blockchain Organizing are:
1. Profiling (supply)
2. Selecting (demand)
3. Delivering (purchase, supply → demand)
4. Paying (payment, demand → supply)
In graphical format:

40 When we explain the organization of supply and demand in this book, we often use: Supply

→Demand (abbreviated to S→D), and vice versa Demand → Supply (D→S). The cooperation
between two sellers (S→S) or two buyers (D→D), can also be brought back to seller and buyer.
There are different types of buyers and sellers such as: employers and employees, producer and
consumer, official and citizen.
41 Can also be brought back to the (philosophical) notion of 'Panta Rhei' by the Greek philosopher Heraclitus: everything flows and you can only stand in the same river once (you can only
make the same transaction once).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

47

Figure 2.3: The organization of supply and demand and the role of coordinating capacity

Within Blockchain Organizing, process 4 can be sub-divided into:
1. Ann creates a transaction, including digital signature and public key for Ben.
2. This transaction is sent to the network and picked up by miners to be verified.
3. After miners have performed a number of checks, the transaction is recorded in
a block.
4. This block is transmitted to the network. Nodes accept this block when the transactions in the block are valid and the amounts have not been spent previously.
The chain (branch) with the most blocks continues to exist.
5. Ben receives the payment (recorded in blockchain).
Process 3 and 4 can also be exchanged. For example, you first have to pay for certain
services before these are provided. Blockchain technology can especially be significant for process 4: paying. In addition, blockchain technology ensures that a transaction is logged non-mutable in a transparent shared accounting system. Therefore,
information from this transaction can be used (process 1) with a next transaction in
order to make a better choice (process 2).
The most common and used form of value is money. Money can go from a person
who owns it (for example Ann) to a person who wants it (Ben). We call this a payment (process 4). A product or service is delivered in exchange for money (process
3). Often this money is used again later to buy another product or service. Money is
a claim on a future purchase, money is a ‘medium of exchange’. It is a catalyst that
facilitates a process, but eventually it is no longer a part of it because it is used again.
In addition to money, other exchange values or calculation units can be used for the
transaction. For example: tokens, hours, credits, rights, energy, waste, other products

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

48

or services. Two hours of gardening by your neighbor can be exchanged for one
hour of tax advice from you to your neighbor.
In addition to the value that is exchanged (purchase) for the counter-value (payment),
values are also created within a blockchain community, like Bitcoin, for the persons
who contribute to the verification of transactions (the miners: the persons who contribute to solving a mathematical puzzle, also called Proof of Work, see also paragraph 3.2). Apart from receiving Bitcoins for providing inspection work, you can also
think of maintaining a Wikipedia page. You receive (service) tokens42 for this that
you can exchange with sponsors of Wikipedia. So, within the Bitcoin community
miners receive bitcoins for the inspection work they perform (similar to paying your
accountant for checking the accounting system). Tokens are exchanged for making
a contribution to the community. A token can then be used internally or externally
(externally via exchange markets). Tokens are a resource and a derivative of the effort
being made to maintain and/or further develop the community.
Apart from these four processes, three aspects are important with regard to values:
ownership, (value) transaction (the flow from seller to buyer) and the recording of
this transaction (which changes the ownership). In principle, blockchain is reducing
the assets of the seller and increasing the assets of the buyer with the same amount.
After all, the accounting system must also remain in balance with Blockchain Organizing.
Ownership
Before you can transfer a value, you must first prove that you are the owner of this
value. It might also be required that you must prove that you are the person entitled
to access, a will for example. You can program a message in such a way that at least
two people must use their key to access a value. This can, for example, be useful
when closing an escrow agreement. In paragraph 3.2 we will see how this is regulated
within the Bitcoin protocol. Core of the solution to prove that you are the owner of
a value, is to use input references. As owner, you have to prove where the value, that
you claim to own, comes from. This is not required/not possible at the first transaction (also called Genesis block). Value is created from scratch in the Genesis block.
In the example of the desert tree, you are the first person who claims the tree and
the tree changes from nature to product.
(Value) transaction
With value we actually mean added value: it must add to what you don’t own yet or
what you cannot develop independently. When we use the term added value within
the organization of work we see that this flows from employee, portfolio worker or
supplier, to buyer (customer). If there is only one seller and buyer, not much coordination is required. But usually you have several sellers, for example with a project
42 In addition to service or utility tokens there are also virtual currency tokens and tokens to fi-

nance an organization (for example: equity, debt and participation rights tokens).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

49

(see also figure 5.1). Blockchain technology can play an important role in this process
like finding and connecting people and resources to a project target.
There is no such thing as a good or bad transaction, a valuable or non-valuable transaction, an authorized or unauthorized transaction. There are no spam transactions,
illegal or immoral transaction. With Blockchain Organizing there are only valid and
invalid transactions. An invalid transaction does not have any input reference and is
not recorded in a block. A valid transaction complies with the consensus rules and it
does not matter who the sender or receiver is or what the value of the transaction is.
It is purely about the logistics of the transport between seller and buyer and if this
has happened. This logistics is separated from the filter (interface) that you, for example, can install with the selection of values (see also figure 3.5).
For the execution of transactions we currently use a variety of agents, also called
institutions in the previously discussed NIE theory. There are many variants conceivable to reduce the insecurity with the flow of value from seller to buyer. You can
organize trust in several ways, via a social ‘script’ and a technical ‘script’. The latter
provides the advantage that it is less susceptible to the subjective interpretation of
man. As we saw before, blockchain technology is a form of coordinating capacity
which can be programmed.
Besides the function of blockchain technology in an existing transaction at time T=0,
this technology can also have an effect on future transactions: time T>0. By logging
transaction data in a non-mutable way, this registration can be used with the next
transaction. Data can be used to formulate the demand better, to profile the supply
better and to coordinate demand and supply better. This more or less ‘automatically’
further reduces the insecurity in a system. It creates a system that can, step by step,
make a better and more efficient choice, and therefore makes the friction disappear
through organizing. The 'machine learns automatically'. The allocation of humans
and resources to finalization is increasingly improving. A reputation management
system is automatically set up, with a shared reality. This can also be used for countering fake news or fake work for example.
Recording
The recording of a transaction (in a block and from a block in a blockchain) is further
discussed in paragraph 3.2. An important technique that is used for this, is the hash
function (a form of encryption), with which you record characteristics and the sequence of transactions (T) in a string of characters (H). If you would only change
one character, for example a period or a comma, into T, then H will also change. In
formula T → H, there is in fact a 1:1 relationship and dependence between the
two. Regardless of the size of T, the image to H (in the case of Bitcoin) has a size of
256 bits. Blockchain uses cryptographic hash functions, with the special characteristic
that the hash is a unique fingerprint of T. Furthermore, a characteristic of the previous block is also recorded in a hash so that once a block is in a chain, you can no

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

50

longer adjust this block and therefore the underlying transactions, without adjusting
the entire blockchain.
These were the three important aspects with value transactions. Before we look at
New Organizing, of which blockchain is an example, first a bit more about what we
mean by ‘Old Organizing’.
2.3 Old organizing
For quite some time organizations have been struggling with issues that they will not
be able to solve with the current perspective, their way of thinking and old management concepts. Government and business are continuously reorganizing without
knowing where they want to go. Companies are addicted to forms and changes: from
brainstorming to ISO certifications, from coaching to key performance indicators.
These are all tools to organize trust and to reduce insecurity, but as a consequence
distrust and complexity increase and productivity falls. This leads to nothing. We
innovate to become more productive, but we are getting increasingly busier.
Fortunately, we meet more and more people in our consultancy practice, who look
at it fundamentally different and also want things to change. They want to get rid of
a system that is focused on continuous economic growth managed with factory
DNA. We still ‘suffer’ under the system that has brought us much welfare, but now
needs to be replaced. We have abolished slavery, but since then we have become
more and more a slave of debts and the (capitalist) system that we have created. Even
students are already being made dependent on 'the system' by student loan programs.
We must constantly grow economically while we actually do not want it anymore and
certainly cannot do that anymore. The Dutch government for example is struggling
with administrative authorities like ‘UWV’ (administrative authority, commissioned
by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment to implement employee insurances
and provide labor market and data services), ‘Sociale Verzekeringsbank’ (organization that implements national insurance schemes), ‘Belastingdienst’ (the tax authorities) and ‘DUO’ (student finance agency). The tax authorities must juggle six hundred
ICT systems while the secretary of education pulls the rug from under the ICT project 'Basic Administration', worth ninety million euros.
The election programs for the House of Representatives elections in 2017 and the
subsequent formation of a new government didn’t structurally address these problems. We as authors dare to say that, with regard to organizing our economy and
welfare, it does not really matter much for which party you vote. Almost all of the
parties are looking for solutions with the wrong perspective, the wrong frame of
mind, the wrong assumptions, experts and organizational forms.
This book is therefore not only about a fundamentally new management technology
that can bring us solutions. This book is mainly about a new context in which we can
use this technology. This book is about a new perspective, and new way of thinking

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

51

and organizing. We will connect a promising new technology to a new management
model. We, as authors of this book and as advisors in our consultancy practice, feel
like pioneers. Pioneers of hope and trust. In addition to an explanation about Blockchain Organizing, this book also contains a new perspective on the question:
How can we organize trust without increasing complexity?
Blockchain Organizing is ‘only’ a tool to realize this. However, an important tool,
with solid principles, foundations and building blocks. But it remains a tool that only
works correctly when we start to think and behave differently. Principles of New
Organizing are the foundation, the basis on which we can stand. Blockchain technology is the organizing capacity or the lever to renew the world. Or as formulated
by Archimedes: “Give me a place to stand and a lever long enough and I can move the world.”
2.4 New Organizing
A large part of our life consists of sharing information and executing transactions.
Trust, or actually organizing trust or reducing uncertainty plays a crucial role in this.
From shopping in the supermarket to buying a house. These are all transactions. We
already have internet to share information. Now there will be an additional layer on
top: blockchain. Blockchain is also called ‘the internet of trust’ or ‘trust network’.
Blockchain Organizing makes it possible to execute transactions almost frictionless,
so without organizational costs, without having to trust each other. You only have
to trust the mathematical proof, the organizational principles, the network and the
person who has created and maintains the protocol. The starting principle of Blockchain Organizing is that the majority of the network benefits when there is no fraud
committed while, at the same time, making the effort to check this. The current systems in use still require expensive intermediaries to organize supply and demand, to
prevent fraud and to reduce insecurity.
Blockchain Organizing is a new way of organizing trust without increasing the complexity. It is a very efficient way to perform government tasks, to organize work43, to
do business with each other and to register transactions and assets in a shared and
distributed ledger or log file. This creates a ‘shared reality of assets and transactions’,
which is shared by the majority. And that is an important condition to trust each
other. So, the buyer and seller no longer have to work with local ledgers, complicated
contracts and conditions, they only have to trust the entire network and the executive
protocol. They do not have to check after the fact because they create consensus in
advance. They set up conditions under which transactions are executed and have a
consensus on consequences if this is not done conform the agreement. For example,
you will only get access to a taxi when you have sufficient credit on the application
with which you want to pay the taxi. You can imagine that this option does not only
have an impact on our work and the way we shop but also on our total economy
43 In this book we mainly see work as providing added value (from supply to demand), whether

or not economized, whether or not via an institute or market.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

52

New Organizing and therein Blockchain Organizing can fundamentally change the
economy and society over time. It is expected that Blockchain Organizing will have
a similar impact on our life as internet did, but hopefully in a more positive way.
Blockchain Organizing is a way to align supply and demand, that is so powerful that
it will make the existing organizations, management concepts and positions irrelevant
and therefore more and more redundant because they are no longer efficient enough
and because they make the world unnecessarily complex and non-transparent.
New Organizing is about organizing supply and demand and mainly about the question what is the most efficient way to reduce insecurity associated with a transaction.
Efficiency means: with the least possible resistance. The question that concerns us
in this book is whether Blockchain Organizing is a more efficient way than the rigid
company, the non-transparent market or the inefficient government. Can Blockchain
Organizing give more meaning to our work, make us more productive, better protect
our privacy, make us less dependent on large (tech)companies and central governments, protect us against fake work, fake news, propaganda and destructive populism
and perform processes more efficiently?
In the next paragraph we will focus more on the five important organizational principles for New Organizing. The purpose of organizing is finding a good balance between supply and demand, finding a way to connect humans and resources to a tasks
in a more productive way. The best coordinating capacity to reduce insecurity is
therefore the one with the lowest transaction costs. To realize this, organizational
principles or foundations play an important role. We will further discuss the five
main principles for New Organizing:
1. ‘specialize, coordinate, finalize’
2. ‘programmable institutions’
3. ‘structured flexibility’
4. ‘apart together’
5. ‘back to basics’
2.5 Five basic principles of organizing
This book is about a fundamentally new way of organizing supply and demand.
Which coordinating capacity provides the least friction between suppliers, buyers and
between supply and demand? Blockchain Organizing comes close. There are still
many more innovations to come but the potential is definitely there and the principles are good, fundamental and sustainable. Blockchain Organizing is based on a
limited set of principles. These will allow you to actually organize all work and it
makes the world less complex. Many managers experience the world as being complex. The only way to understand a complex world is to go back to principles, smallest units and the interconnections between them. In this paragraph we further explain the five main organizational and management principles of Blockchain Organizing.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

53

1. Specialize, coordinate, finalize
The main reason to organize work is: increasing the revenue per person (standard of
living). Through evolution (variation, selection and inheritance) the hunter ‘finds’ out
that you can catch bigger and faster animals through task division (see also figure
1.3). Giving up a piece of autonomy and more specialization leads to a better finalization. But when you specialize, you must also coordinate, otherwise explorers, chasers and spear-throwers will each go their own way and that does not lead to a better
catch.
Apart from organizing work, it is important that you can trust each other when executing transactions. The chaser must be able to trust the spear-thrower that he will
throw his spear on time. When demand and supply are further apart, both in time as
well as distance, the need for reducing insecurity or organizing trust increases. But as
we saw before with the trust paradox, when using traditional institutions (money,
contracts etcetera) to reduce trust, the complexity can increase. This not only increases distrust but productivity and privacy will come under pressure.
Since the era of the hunter/collector we have seen many different ways of coordinating. An often used organizing form in the last hundred years is for example ‘the
hierarchy’ or ‘management’, within companies. Now a new form of coordinating capacity is emerging. Blockchain Organizing is still in its childhood, a conceptual model
for many people that in practice will have to be translated further into more common
concepts, instruments and applications. There will be applications, based on blockchain technology, that bring the best suited specialist together to solve a problem or
to achieve a finalization. Recruitment for example can more and more frequently be
organized on a blockchain.
Back to the hunter: even animals that are much bigger, stronger and faster can be
caught by organizing the hunt: that means by coordinating specialists into an activity.
To realize a better task division and cooperation, coordination is an important condition. Good communication is an important condition for coordination and information is an important condition for communication, while data is an important
condition for information. Within Blockchain Organizing we mainly talk about organizing supply and demand of data. The underlying data of a transaction is mainly
data about the two smallest building blocks: human and resource and about the transaction. What are characteristics such as skills, price and availability? The demand
should also be clear. Only when supply and demand are clear, a transaction can be
made. Then a workflow (collection of conditioned processes) is important. This
workflow can be programmed in a smart contract. Data also plays an important role
in this.
Through communication the first person is quickly able to divide tasks, to specialize
and to cooperate. So, the first person finds out that a specific work division and
giving up a piece of autonomy can lead to a higher revenue per person. Different

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

54

tasks must be assigned. If everyone in a company is a seller and nobody produces a
product, not much will happen. As soon as tasks are divided, the need for management, control systems, driver systems, assessment systems and rewards and punishment systems occur. Organizing comes before managing and includes: focus, shape
and finally perform. When performing, management is especially used for planning,
motivating, coordinating and controlling employees. A good organizational design
reduces management.
Managers and staff positions currently play an important coordinating role within the
existing design: the firm. Organizing is more than just managing and also includes an
organizational design, setting targets, designing tasks and then assigning, organizing
people and resources, coordinating, implementing feedback mechanisms to learn and
to adjust. Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence will play an increasingly important role in this. When your reasoning focusses on the basic activities, as is the
case with Blockchain Organizing, there are many ways to coordinate and to reduce
the insecurity in transactions, but only a few basics. In addition to deploying managers, think using an ICT system, the telephone, self-organizing capacity which is also
a form of coordinating capacity. There are many ways to coordinate and the one with
the lowest transaction cost will survive.
Throughout the centuries there have been various ways to organize our work. Blockchain Organizing is the next stage in the way we can coordinate supply and demand
therefore can organize trust, work, trade and economy. Blockchain Organizing
mainly focuses on renewing the organization of the work of service- and knowledge
workers: no longer within the restricting walls of firms but within partnerships and
shared information and transaction networks. Almost all professions and positions
are as a matter of fact related to processing information and transactions (profiling,
sharing information, saving, searching, communicating, consulting, having meetings,
making transactions, etcetera).
It is estimated that more than half of the workers in western economics spend more
than half of their time on processing information. This includes also people who
provide services such as doctors and teachers. Because information (actually data)
has become the main production factor44, Blockchain Organizing mainly focuses on
the improvement of the productivity of information workers by making transactions
against the lowest possible transaction costs. Therefore, the company is no longer
the only and often also not the best form of organizing capacity. We are ready for
the next step in organizing work and welfare. We see the development45 in 'forms',
with which we have been and will be organizing our work46 as follows:
44 See for example Accenture Technology report 2013

45 This development does not mean that there are no farming communities or crafts anymore but

that the number of people, who organize work with this form, is relatively and absolutely reduced.
46 Markets (a space between at least two entities) have always existed for modern man, however
in the past hundred years markets have been given a different character, for example market

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

55

1. Hunting community (physical power coordinates47)
2. Farming community (season and weather coordinates)
3. Craft/guilds (market coordinates)
4. Company/institute (hierarchy coordinates)
5. Network organization/blockchain community (network protocol coordinates)
2. Programmable institutions
Within the principle of specializing, coordinating and finalizing, programming of the
coordinating position plays an important role in an increasingly digitizing society.
When organizing supply and demand it is important that parties can trust each other.
To realize this we have innovated all kinds of institutions to reduce insecurity. A
small part of the population is still busy with the direct production of food and products (primary processes). The vast majority of the workforce is employed by institutions that act as a lubricant (secondary processes) for an efficient operation of primary processes and therefore our economy. But more and more of the existing institutions become less efficient when you compare them with the options offered by
Blockchain Organizing.
Institutions to reduce the insecurity in a transaction can also be digitized and programmed. We already have programmable money. Money, a contract, a workflow
and the accounting system, they are all institutions that can be programmed. And
everything that can be programmed and contributes to improving the efficiency of
the system, will eventually also be programmed. This means that designers, architects
and software developers will probably become the new trust industry, also called
fiduciaries. In other words: banks, accounting and law firms will increasingly become
IT companies. The idea that you do not have to trust anyone on a blockchain is not
completely correct. For example, when you buy bitcoins via a market place, you will
have to trust a software developer. Because with examples of Mt. Cox48 hack and
‘The DAO-hack49’ it is clear that we must mainly trust organizational designers and
software developers and maintainers when we use blockchain technology50.
3. Structured flexibility
Apart from programmable trust, which has less transaction costs, another organizational principle plays an important role when organizing. We usually organize work
with the use of a (work) organization. We choose between doing it ourselves or outsourcing. A cross between both is called hybrid organizing and that is one of the
information and money are playing an important role now and a market is seen as a place between at least two hierarchies.
47 Communication also coordinates in all examples.
48 On 19 June 2011 Mt. Gox, the biggest Bitcoin exchange at that moment was hacked, whereby,
among other things, 60,000 login details were captured. The rumour is that 850,000 Bitcoins were
stolen.
49 See also paragraph 6.9 in book6.
50 See for example also article in American Banker by Angela Walch: ‘Call Blockchain Developers
What They Are: Fiduciaries’ (09-08-2016).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

56

pillars used by Blockchain Organizing. It provides a better balance between doing it
yourself and outsourcing, between firm and market, between private and public. It
improves the balance between scalability and flexibility. A new organizational concept will always have to find a balance between scalability and flexibility. We also call
this ‘structured flexibility’.
The relationship between scalability and flexibility is therefore an important relationship. Scalability and flexibility are important motives for our evolution. Both natural
organisms (living organizations like mammals), living organizations (cities), as well as
work organizations (firms) are continuously looking for a better balance between
scalability and flexibility. This balance is more and more lost within large-scale, bureaucratic,
ego-centric and closed firms and non-transparent or poorly functioning markets. Therefore, more
and more people are looking for alternatives and find these in fundamentally new
organizational forms. You can cooperate with a customer, a supplier or even a competitor. This can be with one relationship (1:1 relationship, bilateral), but also with
several relationships (1:n relationships, market). However, more and more processes
will be transferred to shared information- and transaction networks or modern partnerships (n:n relationship, community). For example searching and selecting flex
workers or training courses. A community, cooperation or shared service center,
which is connected to a data common, provides sufficient scalability on the one hand
and sufficient flexibility on the other.
So, two main motives when organizing work and welfare are scalability and flexibility.
Large companies often cannot grow any further without losing flexibility and markets
or small organizations are often flexible but lack the scalability of a large organization.
Therefore, we are looking for a better balance between scalability and flexibility and
more and more often this balance is found in new concepts like Blockchain Organizing. The ‘old’ company can thereby act as permanent core or hub of a new network
organization or ‘n:n community’. A network organization is scalable and flexible at
the same time. Information workers become much more productive, privacy can be
assured better, the meaning of work increases and we become less dependent on
large undemocratic companies and institutions. In addition, it is now possible to innovate more effectively and companies can provide an extra social contribution to
the organization of a sustainable welfare. Internet might be the best example of a
network organization. Internet is very scalable (in six connections you know the
whole world51), and man is very flexible. By combining these, structured flexibility is
created. Blockchain Organizing uses internet. Core of Blockchain Organizing is connecting flexible people (and resources) to a task via ‘the’ scalable internet and blockchain protocol.
4. Apart together
51 According to the idea of the ‘six degrees of separation’, everyone one this world is connected

to each other in not more than six steps. See also the Weconomics practice book, paragraph
3.6.3: ‘Profile -> connect -> collaborate’.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

57

A fourth organization principle that we want to explain is the balance between cooperating and competing. Humans cannot exist without humanity and humanity cannot exist without humans. Ubuntu is an African philosophy and means, among others: ‘I am because we are’. People are not just connected to each other, but also
depend on each other to survive. An important basis of Blockchain Organizing is
‘collective self-interest’52. Our society requires a good balance between: individual
and group and between competing and cooperating. In the current spirit of time it
appears that cooperating is becoming more important than competing. To solve the
potentially disruptive problems such as climate change, debts, destructive populism
and inequality we will have to cooperate more while competing appears to worsen
the problems. The protectionist measures that many countries want to take in ‘the
aftermath of the 2008-crisis’, will offer short-term solutions but bring less welfare in
the long-term and cannot make this welfare sustainable. You could say that we must
design a system whereby cooperating becomes the new competing. With Blockchain
Organizing a new balance is found based on more cooperating in the agreements
(infrastructure) and competing in the differences (social cultural). Blockchain Organizing makes it possible that we can temporarily connect many people and resources
to the solve a problem.
5. Back to basics
There are both economists as sociologists who look at the origin and existence of
organization from the organizational theory point of view to organize work and
economy. ‘The economist’ usually looks through market glasses and uses the market
transaction as principle. The ‘sociologist’ uses the company as the starting point. The
organizational expert does not use the total or the building (firm, market or government) as principle, but the smallest building blocks and the connections between
them. To build a house you basically only need bricks and cement. To build an organization you basically only need the smallest building blocks (humans and their
resource) and the connection (coordinating capacity) between them to complete a
task. In the following figures we see that the building blocks remain the same, only
the connections change in time.

52 ‘Collective self-interest’ is actually a contradiction in itself, but important for solving the Trag-

edy of Commons, for example.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

58

Figure 2.4: Organizing is switching connection on and off

You can always bring back a hierarchy from the smallest building block:

Figure 2.5: You can always reconstruct a hierarchy from the smallest building block

A problem of a large part of the organizational theory is that it is often based on the
firm as ideal form to organize work, the non-transparent market to organize transactions and the central government to organize commonalities. Most theories assume
that there would be a firm organization, a market organization and a government
organization. This is right, there are indeed differences but there are much more
similarities. When we reason from the smallest building blocks and connections,
there are much more similarities. By reasoning from the similarities, the world suddenly becomes a lot less complex. Within Blockchain Organizing, the company is a
collection of humans with the connection: ‘is employee of’ and a city a collection of
citizens with the connection: ‘is citizen of’. So a HR-systems that keeps records of
employees is just a collection smallest building stones. And when one leaves for

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

59

another company, only the connection changes if that person has a Personal Data
Service. The smallest building blocks remain the same, the connections change.
Most theories also suggest that there are no transactions made within firms. But
transactions are also made within a firm, although these are not always paid for with
money. And also a market can have a certain hierarchy, or there can be a concentration of power concentration. You can see a staff department within a company as
some kind of commonality, just as the fire station and primary school in a city. Eventually everything can be flattened to the smallest building block and the connection
between them. The type of connection may be different but it remains a connection.
The civil servant has another type of connection than an employee. As a civil servant
you have a professional confidentiality and you work under an administrative law.
But a doctor, for example, also has to deal with the medical confidentiality and disciplinary law.
So far, we saw five organizational principles of Blockchain Organizing: ‘specializecoordinate-finalize’, ‘programmable institutions’, ‘structured flexibility’, ‘apart together’ and ‘back to basics’. They are foundations for a better balance of cooperation
between supply and demand, scalability and flexibility and competing and cooperating. To conclude this chapter about the organizational component of Blockchain
Organizing, we mainly like to point out the importance of organizational science and
of cooperating smartly within business ecosystems, or in blockchain term: shared
transactions networks.
Cooperating is sharing information and executing transactions
A large part of cooperating consists of sharing of information and executing transactions. As we saw before, a transaction is very abstract: the flow of added value
from the supply to demand, from specialist to finalization. More concretely, a transaction is purchasing a course, a computer or this book. We already have internet for
sharing information. An additional layer is added to this. Blockchain Organizing
makes it possible to share information, execute transactions and cooperate in a very
cheap way. Currently we often require expensive intermediaries to organize trust or
coordinate between supply and demand.
Blockchain Organizing is a new way to very efficiently perform government tasks, to
organize our work, to do business with each other and to register transactions in a
shared accounting system. The buyer and the seller no longer have to trust each
other. They only have to trust the entire network and the protocol. You can imagine
that this option will not only have an impact on your way of managing and cooperating, but also on our economy and society. Blockchain Organizing will probably
have a similar if not bigger impact on our lives as internet. Blockchain Organizing is
a way of organizing that is so powerful, that it will give another meaning to many
existing management concepts, positions, organization and methods to organize
trust. Existing forms will not all disappear but they will get a different interpretation.
Introduction of the car has not lead to the total elimination of the horse-drawn

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

60

carriage. In cities like Bruges, Vienna and New York you can still use a horse and
carriage.
The role of organization science
Is the market or the firm with a hierarchy and managers the most efficient way to
cooperate? Or are there more efficient forms? Organizing is about solving management problems, is about solving other people’s problems. If you could solve the
problem by yourselves, you wouldn’t need an organization. Organizational science
plays an important role here. Organizational science is mainly engaged in studying,
designing and developing organizations; management mainly with executing and
managing existing firms. The design stage is especially important for Blockchain Organizing and in this book we mainly talk about Blockchain by Design. This means
that we do not primarily focus on changing the existing firms or even partnerships,
but on a fundamental renewal. We build new partnership organizations from the
foundations and smallest building blocks where existing assignments, processes or
projects can be transferred to the new organizations.
An important organizational issue that has been keeping politics, business and citizen
busy for a while now is the organization of European cooperation. Currently this
cooperation is mainly designed via the European Union. Especially after Brexit, more
and more people are wondering how you can best organize this cooperation and
whether existing perspectives and models are still working. At national level we wonder for example whether we still need provinces and how councils can best be organized to handle their new tasks as part of the participation society in the Netherlands
for example. The possible separation of Catalonia and Scotland for example are also
organizing challenges. And at organizational level more and more people have the
feeling that cooperation within and between organizations is not really working.
However, most of these partnerships between firms do have the ingredients for a
good cooperation. There is a reason to cooperate, there is an ambition, participants
in projects follow training courses and they use the best project management tools,
but still... there is that nagging feeling that there is too much friction, double work,
people bailing out or agreements are not met. How could this be possible?
Why is it that we hardly become more productive while we invest a lot in technology
and smart cooperation tools? Are the tools not good enough or are these tools used
in the wrong organizational forms? Is this not the time to thoroughly revise the formats that until now were regarded as ideal: firm, government and market? In this
book we do not primarily focus on new tools or the application of tools in their
existing forms. We mainly focus, with a new perspective, organizational model,
knowledge platform and transition program, on fundamentally improving cooperation by renewing the organizational forms. We use the existing organizational forms
less, which have become too expensive to keep up with the increasing welfare costs.
There is a need for a fundamentally different perspective on cooperation and more
knowledge of organizational science. Currently, mainly economists, politicians and
directors of government, banks and large companies are ‘controlling’ our social-

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

61

economic system and join programs on national television. In an article of the Dutch
Financial newspaper, only parties from the old establishment with certain interests,
share an opinion on the bubble that Bitcoin is about to become53. Maybe it is time
to replace next to old ‘insights and experiences’, also people on television, radio or
at the newspapers? Maybe it is time to invite more philosophers, anthropologist and
organizational expert on television and less economist, CEO’s and politicians. We
need people with a broader view who understand the key connections of communities and society.
Ten key connections of Blockchain Organizing
Within Blockchain Organizing we distinguish a number of different types of connections. We need these to design, set up and eventually manage a blockchain community and to allow added value to flow in your community:
1. Value: The first and most important connection that must be there is a shared
value: what do you find important and what not and how would you act in certain
circumstances?
2. Purpose: What is the purpose of your community? What is the function in the
bigger picture? Why do you exist as community?
3. Principles: What organizational principles do you use?
4. Perspective (analysis, context, history and theory): What is your historical and
organizational analysis of the problem? What is the context of the twenty-first
century? Which assumptions and theories do you use?
5. Vision (where to?): What do you believe in, where are you going, what is your
direction, what is the dot on the horizon? What is the space between here/now
and there/later?
6. Ambition (how high do you set the bar and what is the time frame?): what is the
SMART54 objective of the next step and what is the target group?
7. Coordination (strategy): what is the connection between demand (connection 16) and supply (connection 8-10) ? How do you realize the ambition? Which capacity or technology do you use to connect demand and supply? How do you
organize trust?
8. Governance: how do you make decisions, how do you find consensus, who controls what? How do you organize decision making? What is the political coordinating capacity?
9. Structure: which infrastructure will help you? How will you connect people and
resources to the objective? What is the technical coordinating capacity? How do
you connect your community t a data common?
10. Culture: What are the social cultural values? What is the coordinating capacity to
create human interaction, to exchange ideas, to learn and to organize trust?
You could see 1 up to 6 as the demand side of organizing (D), 7 the pivot point:
coordinating capacity (C) and 8 up to 10 the supply side (S). As we saw before value
53 See article by Joost Dobber in Financieel Dagblad: ‘Are we witnessing a crackling bitcoin bub-

ble?’ (16-09-2017, Dutch only).
54 SMART: Specific Measurable Acceptable Reasonable and Time-bound.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

62

flows from supply to demand, using coordinating capacity, or in formula: S → C →
D.

Figure 2.6: Ten key connection of a community

2.6 When hierarchies become markets
As mentioned before, people who heard of Copernicus ‘new world view’, did not
believe him at first. But many decades later, Galileo Galilei proved in practice that
Copernicus’s theory and new world view was right. Even now, traditional organizations can hardly understand that they are no longer the center of doing business and
therefore find it difficult to understand the impact of Blockchain Organizing. This is
not so much because they cannot understand blockchain technology but rather it is
more that they cannot imagine a world without the firm as superior form to organize
work with, or without the government to organize commons. Private organizations
see themselves between purchase and sales, public organizations between politics en
civilians. And between these two traditional worldviews, we have traditional markets,
where data and transactions are not processed in a way that aligns with technologies
that are available.
The last disruptive view of how to organize work came from Ronald Coase in his
important and famous work: ‘The Nature of the Firm’ (1937). In this work he basically explained why hierarchies emerge, exist and grow. Firms exist and grow because
it is cheaper to do it yourself then to contract it out. When another organization has
to do the work, you have to make transaction costs such as finding a supplier (who
incurs marketing cost to be found), contract cost, and payment and security costs.
So if the transaction cost are higher than your own organization costs, it is better to
do it yourself. Between organizations (on markets) we have transaction costs, within
organization we have interactions costs, also called internal transaction costs. These

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

63

are all examples of connection costs to connect humans and resources to activities
when humans can’t do it themselves.

Figure 2.7: Transaction cost theory Ronald Coase

When we start seeing a company as a market and interactions as transactions, it will
soon become clear that 'the firm' is not an efficient coordinating mechanism or capacity. If you, as an organization, want to apply digital transformation, it is important
to let go of your own old world view and become (part of) a network organization.
It is time to let go of the last management innovation of Taylor and Ford because
the transaction coast (internal and external) will go to zero in a digital era. This transformation takes place step by step, similar to the development of, for example, the
assembly line. The implication of the organizational aspect in this transformation will
be far more difficult and will take far more time than the technical aspect. It is known
that technical developments have a higher pace then social cultural changes. In this
book we mostly focus on the organizational, the leadership and management aspect
of embedding disruptive organization technologies into new organization forms that
align better with new technologies. The first step within Blockchain Organizing is
probably the development and application of blockchain technology within 1:1 and
1:n connections on a market, and after that within n:n markets. After that, hierarchies
and markets will blur into one modern integrated single way of doing business, the
sharing of information and execution of transactions will be as easy as purchasing
this book via Amazon.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

64

Figure 2.8: When interactions become transactions, hierarchies become markets

Hierarchy: no freedom within a so called free world?
You could see a hierarchy or firm as a none-free system within a free social economic
order (capitalism). When you take a closer look at the way work is organized within
hierarchies, you can conclude that a lot of activities are fixed. Not being able to
choose how to do your work can lead to stress and burnout. And in a dynamic environment, with accelerating technological developments, a more flexible way of organizing should be considered, designed, developed and applied. The ‘fixed’ situation
of the firm is not that strange, because that was the intention of designers such as
Taylor and Ford. They had to align capricious humans, farmers, housewives and
craft-men, into the very tight and systematic way of working on an assembly line,
between nine and five, in a factory away from home. If you take a closer look at
hierarchies you could see some characteristics that don’t fit the free world most people think we are living in:
▪ Fixed wages: earn the same as your colleague, independent from the output.
▪ Other departments influence or even determine how you do your work.
▪ Workers can’t choose because their boss will think for them.
▪ Employees ‘know’ their career because the only expected way is up.
▪ Most information workers, work between nine and five in the ‘same’ offices.
Transaction cost theory
As we will see in this book, Blockchain Organizing is based on the insight that we
need a better balance between fixed and free. Once you start to see humans as the
most important part of organizing work, instead of departments or companies,
Blockchain Organizing will gain interest of academia, leadership and management
because it provides a better balance between hierarchy and market, competition and
cooperation, scalability and flexibility. It sees humans and resources and activities as
the smallest building blocks and organizes work by connecting these building blocks
via transactions at minimal costs.
When we start seeing a company as a market and interactions as transactions, it will
soon become clear that 'the firm' is becoming the less efficient and therefore most

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

65

expensive coordinating mechanism. As mentioned before, probably the most import
article on this issue came from Ronald Coase, and later from other economists such
as Oliver Williamson who continued on the work of Coase. Coase was asking the
question: Why do firms emerge, exist and grow? He tried to give an economic explanation of why individual farmers, craft-men and housewives, choose to cooperate
under a nexus of contracts, to form partnerships, coops, companies and other business entities rather than trading bilaterally through contracts on a market. As we saw
before, he came up with the transaction cost as antagonist of organization cost. Organization costs are cost for hierarchies, management, staff, inefficiencies and overcapacity. Organization cost will increase as a result of distrust and bureaucracy. In
combination with increasing organization costs, transaction costs will go to zero as a
result of digitalization. From the point where organization costs are higher than
transaction costs: interactions become transactions and hierarchies become markets.

Figure 2.9: When the organization costs become higher than the transaction costs,
hierarchies can become markets.

As mentioned before, one of the key questions in philosophy is: ‘Why is there something instead of nothing?’ Why is there management instead of no management?
Management is there because, as we saw before, more than hundred years ago farmers, crafts-men and housewives started to work in factories. These ‘fickle’ people had
to fit within the rhythm of the assembly line. By inventing management, with time
measurements, labor analysis, permanent jobs, hierarchies, rewarding and punishing,
this became possible. After more than hundred years this management invention
evolved into a system with more disadvantages than benefits as the organization
costs are rising because we make super specialists more efficient but we ‘forget’ to
coordinate them in a modern and efficient way.
Because of super specialization and the natural movement towards more local efficiency instead of aggregated productivity improvement, more and more super specialists have to be coordinated, on a global scale, towards aggregated efficiency and
finalization. No longer is traditional management the most productive way to

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

66

coordinate these specialists to activities, to connect supply and demand, but shared
information and transaction networks. A research report55 of the US based company
ServiceNow shows that a lot of work that is done by humans is administrative, compartmentalized and routine work. ServiceNow commissioned the company Lawless
Research to conduct a study about the state of work in companies with 500 or more
employees. Lawless Research asked nearly thousand managers whether todays work
processes are efficient or sap their productivity.
ServiceNow needed to quantify the productivity drain as a result of using email,
phone calls and spreadsheets to perform routine administrative tasks within a company. The findings would prove the value for their products and services. So, this is
not an independent and scientific research. ServiceNow is a market party with interests in the outcome. We as authors however believe that the results reflect the problem of productivity drain as the result of too many and poor coordinated and by
technology facilitated intermediaries in the organization of work. Some highlights
from the survey:
1. Managers say that they spend two days a week, on average, on administrative tasks
as a result of internal transactions.
2. Nine in ten managers say their productivity depends on the efficiency of routine
work processes provided by other departments, such as delivering marketing services, issuing purchase orders, and onboarding employees.
3. The majority of managers say these work processes are time consuming, and about
half say they are frustrating.
4. Eight in ten companies, both large and small, still use unstructured manual tools
such as email, spreadsheets and personal visits.
5. Four in five managers say that routine work processes cause significant delays.
6. Three in four managers want simple, self-service support processes, easy to use.
In our opinion, these results explain the rise of organization costs and therefore the
interest of more organizations in a model that will boost productivity.
What if companies become markets (again)?
When you want people to work together, basically you can choose between two organizational structures: one based on hierarchy or one based on the market (a transaction sphere between at least two hierarchies). A firm is hierarchical power order:
information is mostly bottom up and decision-making top down. The advantages are
speed, clarity (one chain of command) and scalability. In this hierarchy, not everyone
needs to know everything or have access to all information to find consensus or
make decisions. Decisions are often made at the top and then scattered into the organization. A disadvantage of this structure is a single point of failure. This is the

55 ServiceNow (www.servicenow.com) see report: ‘Today’s State of Work: the Productivity Drain’

(April 2015).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

67

opposite situation of fault tolerance systems that are at the basis of decentralized
systems such as internet and distributed ledger systems.
In a market, decision-making takes place on a more decentralized basis and consensus is necessary between seller and buyer. All market participants need information
to make decisions. The more suppliers and customers, the more data is potentially
available in a market. Especially in markets with many actors, also called fat markets,
who can share (if necessary on an anonymous basis) data, work will be much more
efficient and better decisions can be made. We call these rich markets: many suppliers
and customers with transparent data and algorithms. In this case, markets can perform better than hierarchies. The presence of a lot of data in a hierarchy does not
necessarily mean that the company will make better decisions or function better because the data doesn’t always reach every decision maker and people suffer from a
limited cognitive capacity. When someone makes a bad decision in a market, the
market as a whole will not suffer. But if the leader of a company makes a few stupid
mistakes, the company will have to face the consequences.
Hierarchies and markets have both advantages and disadvantages in organizing data
to decide on connecting capacities to activities. What we are looking for is a more
hybrid form that reinforces the advantages and weakens the disadvantages. When we
can model interactions within hierarchies as transactions and coordinate work as if it
was a market, both will integrate into a network where supply and demand will connect in the most efficient way. Internet en blockchains are very scalable and humans
very flexible. So, the basis of a new organization structure is structured flexibility, a
system that is both scalable and flexible in itself. In addition to the mentioned article
of Ronald Coase, ‘The Nature of the Firm’ and his key question, why do firms exist,
we could ask ourselves the question now: ‘Why do firms still exist? Why do we still use
hierarchies and markets between them to organize trust, work and economies in an
environment that requires something else? Just by asking these questions, you will
become aware of the fact that most organizations still use an old-fashioned organization paradigm that is not suitable for the (digital) future.
As will be clear to many, and mentioned before, we are undergoing a digital transformation in which the real physical and digital world are increasingly converging
into a single integrated modern way of living and working. More and more companies will become data companies. Not only data organization, data economy and data
logistics play an important role, but also and especially digital leadership. We are developing from an industrial economy to a data economy. This digital transition has
far-reaching consequences for existing organizations that are insufficiently (quickly)
adjusting. When selling or insuring a house for example, the physical home is becoming less important and the safe storage and access to data about the house is
becoming more important. These data must be complete, honest, reliable and transparent, and must take into account pragmatic, semantic and syntactic aspects. To
insure a home, complete and reliable data is needed about home, environment and
occupant. Selling a house means changing the digital connection 'A is owner of house

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

68

X', to 'B is owner of house X'. It is important that A proves that he/she is the owner
of house X, house X can only be sold once (one digital transfer) and the digital ownership transport from A to B must be done safely. This can technically be done without land registry, notary and broker. Thanks to the rapidly developing of blockchain
technology, more and more people can imagine that insuring or selling a house in
the future is as simple as sending an email.
With regard to the organization of the supply and demand of data, many organizations suffer from certain choices from the past that were correct at that time, but
have far-reaching consequences in the present. At the end of the last century, not the
answer to a question was leading in automation, but the automation of internal processes. The known and so-called spaghetti IT-landscapes are the result. Companies
and (especially) government (agencies) have to amortize hundreds of millions euro
as a result of failed IT projects. Through an interweaving of large amounts of functions and internal interfaces, a large number of applications have arisen that also have
to be accessed more and more frequently via the internet and external applications.
Data interoperability is not realized by a joint ontology, taxonomy and semantics, but
by API’s, webservices and in the worst and in most cases by transferring data into
their own systems. These are often Microsoft Office applications such as Word and
Excel. IT management costs and therefore organizational costs increase while transaction costs decrease due to digitization. As we saw in figure 2.9: more and more
organizations are coming to the point that hierarchies become markets because the
organizational costs are higher than the transaction costs. If organizational costs continue to rise due to complexity, bureaucracy, distrust and fakework and the transaction costs continue to fall as a result of the digital transformation, hierarchies will
become (again) markets.
As a result of the new European privacy law or general regulation, increasing pressure
on the prevention of data breaches, fakenews and new technologies such as blockchain, supply and demand of data can be organized fundamentally differently. Not
owning data becomes important, but access to it. The 'questioning' of another ITsystem can be seen as a transaction, as well as receiving an answer. These transactions
can then be validated on three points (are you the owner of the data, did you only
send it once and has it been done securely). These validated transactions can then be
stored on a non-mutually blockchain. Due to these developments, it is likely that data
will increasingly be organized with people as a unit of analysis, design and development and no longer companies and governments. This also gives concepts such as
Big Data, Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence a different meaning because they
assume that (a lot of) data is still present at central companies and governments,
while this can also be decentralized to the people. And if people will not give access
to their data, these concepts also take on a different meaning.
These developments will change the nature of most economies from an economy
with factory DNA, firms and non-transparent markets to a rich data economy.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

69

3. Blockchain as technology
For the purpose of this book we will clarify a number of important technical concepts within Blockchain Organizing. The intention of this is not to fully understand
or fathom the technology but to give you a better idea what the possible organizational consequences of blockchain technology for management, your own organization or business could be.
Many people judge Bitcoin or blockchain technology on what it currently is. But if
we had left internet for what it was56, we would now only use it to send e-mails. We
would not have explored the almost infinite possibilities that internet now offers us,
in more detail. Blockchain technology and Blockchain Organizing are also far from
being finished, we are just at the beginning. At the end of the second decade of the
twenty-first century, blockchain technology, you could say is just in its early childhood. If we would limit blockchain technology to Bitcoin, then you could say it is
finished, because Bitcoin has been in production since 2009 and the protocol is still
running. It is not running with its initial code because we have witnessed several forks
such as the one in August 2017. This fork has led to a split of the coin into Bitcoin
(Core) and Bitcoin Cash. There are always new challenges and problems to solve, for
example: hacks at market places, transaction speed, scalability, size of the database,
centralization of mining pools, regulations etcetera The technology, legislation as well
as the development of ideas about what can and cannot be done, are far from finalized. In other words: blockchain refuses to be what it is. It is not a concept that does
the thinking for you, not even a way of thinking. It is rather a concept that makes
you think.
Bitcoin is a revival and further tightening of the cryptocurrency concept that was first
described in 1998 by Wei Dai on a cypherpunk mailing list57. The idea of Wei Dai,
called B-money, was to develop an anonymous, peer-to-peer electronic payment system without intervention of a central bank. Organizing trust, that is now provided
by banks and other intermediaries could be replaced by cryptography and software.
This idea was later picked up and further developed into a working product: Bitcoin.
The creator of Bitcoin, Satoshi Nakamoto, refers in his work to B-Money and he was
in e-mail contact with Wei Dai58.
56 From 1969: An efficient and reliable way to enable universities that work with different com-

puter systems for Defence/ARPA, to communicate with each other. It was chosen to cut up the
little parcels that found the best way to the receiver via a distributed network and which are then
assembled again into a message. This way the network is less dependent on the failure of nodes
(single point of failure and fault tolerance systems. See also ARPA project in Weconomics practice book, paragraph 5.3.5: ‘Free and open source’.
57 A cypherpunk is an activist who uses cryptography and privacy improving technology for social and political changes.
58 See for example the book by Paul Vigna and Michael J. Casey: 'The Age of Cryptocurrency,
How Bitcoin and Digital Money Are Challenging the Global Economic Order' (2015).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

70

Bitcoin is mainly a form of cryptocurrency, a form of value that no longer just includes money but also software code or programmable money. For example, the
government can stipulate in advance that housing benefits can only be spend on rent.
Bitcoin does not have any central authority over this, such as central banks have over
fiat currencies. However, Bitcoin has the disadvantage that it is volatile at the moment and (exhange) transaction and savings (assets) are not guaranteed. The technology behind Bitcoin belongs to nobody, similar to technology to send an e-mail or
the format language to develop a website. They do not belong to a certain company
or a certain government. The software that makes it possible to pay in bitcoins is
open source and is further developed and managed by Bitcoin communities, of which
Bitcoin Core currently is the most important one59.
Bitcoin (and it forks) can mainly be seen as proof that blockchain technology works
long-term and stable in the practice of digital money. It is the longest running and
probably most used application of blockchain technology as we know it today. But
Bitcoin is definitely not the only application of blockchain technology and Bitcoin
and blockchain are not the same. Blockchain technology is much broader and is used
for instance by Ethereum for the development of smart contracts, IOTA for the
communication between machines, Stellar for cross border payments or Cardano for
a more scientific and research driven approach. Bitcoin is mainly a blockchain application for digital money. And money, whether digital or not, also has specific disadvantages such as speculation, calculating interest and saving.
Money is a tool (‘intermediary’ or kind of ‘catalyst’) to exchange two values. You can
sell your house to someone and exchange this value for a lifetime of daily grocery
shopping. The new owner of your house ensures that you no longer have to do any
grocery shopping for the rest of your life. You probably will not go for this option
but demand money for the sale of your house. Then you have more choices against
which value you will sell your house. With the proceeds, you can buy more than just
groceries. Money is then a claim on buying other values in the future. It is the intention of a central bank to keep this claim as stable as possible. However, you do trust
that you can buy a similar value with the money you receive. Traditionally, money as
currency, as medium of exchange, has a number of functions such as calculation unit,
means of payment and savings/investments. We see these functions with digital
money, as well as the disadvantages such as speculation, money laundering and decoupling from real values. An advantage of crypto currency is that people can spend
it themselves (for example within own communities) and exchange it again for fiat
currencies such as dollars and euros on exchange markets60. Furthermore, you can
also program digital money and allocate it in advance.

59 See also website bitcoincore.org

60 It is still debated if this is legally allowed, but how do you define a value?

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

71

3.1 History
You may know the metaphor of the dwarf sitting on the shoulders of a giant. Isaac
Newton formulated it as follows: “If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of
giants.” Each new invention builds on the strength of previous inventions. An invention does not just drop from the sky. We see more and we look further than our
predecessors, because we have more history and knowledge to build on. The ‘invention’ of Bitcoin and the blockchain technology did not fall from the sky either.
Satoshi Nakamoto continued to build on the knowledge and expertise of others. You
can see blockchain technology as a puzzle that has been put together by Nakamoto
and was ‘finished’ by adding the missing ‘pieces of the puzzle’. As an example: Nakamoto has solved the long outstanding mathematic Byzantine Generals problem,
partly due to inexpensive computing capacity, storage capacity and internet connections. In this paragraph, we have a closer look at the ‘invention’ of Bitcoin. For the
purpose of this book we will provide a simplified and non-technical overview of the
origin of blockchain technology, with special attention to the following ‘pieces of the
puzzle’ (with in brackets the period/from time in which you can place these pieces
of the puzzle):
▪ Cryptography (3000 B.C.)
▪ Database technology (1962)
▪ TCP/IP Internet Network Protocol (1974)
▪ Cipher Block Chaining (1976)
▪ Distributed systems (1978)
▪ Byzantine Generals Problem (1982)
▪ Commercial internet (1995)
▪ Digital currency and cryptocurrency (1998)
Cryptography
The use of cryptography, hidden or secret language, goes back to ancient Egypt. It is
a technology to encrypt messages by replacing letters with numbers for example.
With each transport of value (so also of messages) we are dealing with a sender,
receiver and medium. When a message is not encrypted, a third party, not being the
sender or receiver, who has access to the sender, receiver or medium, could read the
message with reasonable efforts. By encrypting, the chance this will happen is reduced. Cryptography especially took a huge flight during the Second World War,
partly thanks to the efforts of Alan Turing61. Nowadays most e-mails are encrypted
by default to prevent abuse. Currently quantum cryptography is the latest development in terms of cryptography. Quantum cryptography is used, amongst others, to
exchange keys which can later be used to encrypt and decrypt messages. It can be
detected if a connection is being drained. But quantum cryptography is also sensitive
to hackers, albeit with a lot of effort62. Cryptography is an area whereby, after a certain period, a new method is undermined by an action, that makes it possible to
61 See also Weconomics analysis book, paragraph 6.4: ‘Internet in historical perspective'.

62 See for example article by Stephen McGann Technology Reporter van BBC News: ‘Tricking

the perfect code machine’ (13-08-2011).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

72

intercept and decrypt messages. It is an action-reaction ‘game’. Absolute security will
never be achieved. But what really matters is security that cannot be cracked at an
acceptable cost. In addition, it is interesting to investigate if you can remove the reason for a hack for instance. If a thief does not have a customer to sell to, he probably
will not steal it in the first place.
Database technology
The database principles that we use today, also for decentralized databases, largely
stem from the 1960s. The Oxford English Dictionary reports that the term ‘database’, was probably first used in 1962 in a report of the company: ‘System Development Corporation’ in California. A database can be seen as a storage tool for data
(attributes and their values). It can be compared to a warehouse where goods are
stored and can be retrieved from. The database that is most used by managers is
probably ‘the excel sheet’. To create a database, you must develop a database model
from an ontology and taxonomy and then a database. Within the blockchain infrastructure, these form the core for carrying out meaningful, reliable and secure transactions, checking and recording of data.
Blockchain technology will not change much to the (im) possibilities of a database.
The organizing, storing and retrieving data from storage is also possible via a distributed database, whereby the participating nodes in the network store attributes in their
own database via consensus rules. It does not matter for the storage whether a database is organized centrally or locally. The basis and technical principles remain comparable, the governance model is slightly different.
So, you can compare the basis of a database with a warehouse to store products that
are in a box, in a (horizontal) rack. You can compare the box with a cell in a spreadsheet and the product with the content/value of a cell. An empty rack in a warehouse
can be compared with an empty row in a spreadsheet. By placing boxes on a rack,
the cells in a row in a spreadsheet are filled. So, the rack contains products that belong
for instance to one seller, buyer, employee, consumer or citizen. By organizing horizontal racks this way, you can put the same products (attributes) in the same column
(comparable with a column in a spreadsheet). There are three main processes in a
database/warehouse. You can: bring an attribute/product into storage, keep it in
storage and retrieve it from storage. There can be an operation between ‘retrieving
from storage’ and ‘bringing into storage’ (again) that changes the value of an attribute,
sets it to zero or empties it. You can take a box from the warehouse and attach a
label with the sell-by date on all products and subsequently put them back again. In
terms of a database, there are four main functions, you can:
▪ create and store data for the first time
▪ retrieve data
▪ delete data
▪ maintain data: adjusting the value of an attribute (update = retrieve + delete +
create)

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

73

In addition to performing operations on an existing database, the design and maintenance of the database structure is also important. This means adding an attribute (like
adding a column to a spreadsheet), cancelling an attribute (deleting a column in a
spreadsheet) or replacing an attribute by another attribute (deleting column and adding a new one). You can compare this with adding or removing racks in a warehouse.
The important requirements for a data model and database are:
▪ data may not be lost;
▪ data may only be accessible to those for whom it is intended (correct rights and
range for a certain role);
▪ it must be easy to write (store), change (mutate), retrieve (read) and remove (delete) data, without affecting the operation of the entire database;
▪ the integrity (accuracy, timeliness and completeness) of the data must be assured
(via reference keys or an unique identification reference must be made to the
correct position in a table);
▪ the consistency (coherent and free of contradiction) between attribute, entity, record and table must be assured;
▪ data may not be corrupted (by implementing adjustments, contamination of the
database, double data).
These requirements do not have to be related to the way that records are stored.
These requirements must be met with both central as well as local storage. But the
perspective we have when designing databases will change. When the first databases
where designed in the early 1960s our society and way of organizing processes was
still in the ‘Industrial Revolution phase’. The firm, the government and the bank were
the thinking units for the organization of supply and demand and with that the organization of databases, trust and work. These entities had to keep records of employees, customers and citizens. Because this perspective is changing, the functional
and technical need for data models and physical databases will also change. An important development for instance is that people themselves, and no longer companies, keep personal data to perform a process. The individual keeps a file and provides data (Bring Your Own Data) when a third party requires this for the performance of a process that the individual has requested.
With blockchain we move to a kind of network of databases that keep each other
informed, controlled and updated. A network that (technically) can be shared with
everyone and where everyone can connect to, at least where it concerns a public or
permissionless blockchain. But locally organized databases are relatively expensive
compared to centrally organized databases. So, there must be an advantage to switch.
A local architecture offers mainly advantages when we no longer design with the firm
as thinking unit, but consider the process and separate actors in a business-ecosystem. Processes will less and less take place within organizations and transform to
processes between organizations (bilaterally, 1:1 and via markets 1:n) and eventually
processes within shared transaction networks (n:n). With the use of more local but
indeed (partly) synchronized databases, actors in the network can perform better and

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

74

check each other to accomplish a shared reality as basis for trust. Checks on whether
the sender has correctly claimed the value or if this value is not spent twice and the
transaction took place in a secure way. Being able to perform checks yourself means
that trust can be organized in a different way. Therefore, we require fewer intermediaries. The advantage of fewer intermediaries is that the complexity does not increase so the transaction costs remain low and the productivity increases.
So, when you create a blockchain design you must consider the basic elements, principles and (im) possibilities of a database. Processing a blockchain transaction can in
its core be reduced to retrieving, processing and replacing (the values of) attributes
from/in a database. The important difference with the (desired) functionality of not
blockchain databases in relation to a blockchain database is that once a value is in
the database it cannot be mutated or deleted. Once a transaction took place and the
network agreed on this event, this event cannot be altered or delete. On a blockchain
you can’t unscramble scrambled eggs.
TCP/IP Internet Network Protocol
In 197463 Vint Cerf and Robert Kahn designed something that later turned out to be
revolutionary: the TCP/IP protocol. When someone asks you: How are you doing?
You usually answer with: Yes great, and how are you? It is not written anywhere that
you must give this answer, but it is some kind of communication protocol, a kind of
automatism. If someone asks A, you reply with B. You can do this much more precisely in an instruction for a computer, so it does exactly what you want. The same
holds true for sending and receiving messages via a ‘telephone line’.
Within the TCP/IP protocol the IP address acts as the unique identification of the
sender and receiver and the TCP protocol provides the connection, the secure
transport between sender and receiver. The core of the methodology is ‘packageswitching’: messages are cut up and sent from A to B in parts and via different routes
(multiple simultaneous sessions). This method improves the efficiency and robustness (reliability) of the network. The ‘invention’ of the TCP/IP protocol might be
the most important building block of what we now call internet. TCP offers the
possibility to send reliable, structured and faultless bytes from A to B on an IP network. Widely used applications such as e-mail, internet browsers, communication
platforms, administration packages in the cloud and file sharing applications rely on
this protocol.

Cipher Block Chaining
The name blockchain probably first appeared with the block encoding technology
also called: Block Cipher. It is a method to convert a piece of text (block) into a block
63 See also publication of The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE): 'A Proto-

col for Packet Network Intercommunication' (May 1974).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

75

of numbers via encryption and decryption. The easy and quick way to do this is via
Electronic Code Book (ECB). A disadvantage of this is that a third person can easily
add blocks and remove a message or blocks. When you connect blocks via a link
with a previous block (like input reference with blockchain technology) this becomes
more difficult. A new block that has to be added then becomes dependent on the
previous blocks from the chain. We call this method: Cipher Block Chaining (CBC).
Distributed systems
Since the 1960s the network architecture has gone through a number of phases;
mainframe, client-server, web/cloud and now decentralized and distributed computing. Distributed computing is more and more possible due to falling prices for hardware and connections, increasing computing power and virtualization. Distributed
computing is a technique that is the foundation for applications such as Dropbox
and Google Drive whereby you can work on a shared document simultaneously, with
several people, from different computers. It is a technique whereby an operation is
not performed by one computer but by a group of computers that are connected to
each other and find consensus about the last change in a document (also a sequencing
challenge just as blockchain).
This technique was already developed by Leslie Lamport64 in the 1970s. He developed a technique to describe the behavior of systems. This technique is also called
the Lamport clock. It is a logical clock that ensures that the clocks of the participating
computers logically coincide. Therefore, it is possible to formalize ‘previous actions’
in a system and determine the sequence of events. Initially the purpose of distributed
computing was primarily the sharing of computing capacity. When sharing local
computing capacity each computer has much more computing capacity and relatively
little data has to be sent via the connection. Nowadays this technique can be used to
synchronize distributed accounting systems. A number of advantages of this technique are:
▪ less dependency on a central server that can fail;
▪ because several users produce and consume data together a more democratic governance structure can be implemented;
▪ nodes that have surplus computing or storage capacity can make this available for
nodes that have a shortage or for commonality purposes.
Apart from the logical clock, Lamport also made a great contribution to finding consensus within distributed systems. How do you determine the sequence in which
events take place within all participating computers? How can you make a decision
if not all computers are switched on and participate in the decision-making process
at the same time? Lamport has described this mathematical problem based on an
example of a parliament with part-time participants. This example is known as ‘The

64 Leslie Lamport (1942 - ) American computer scientist and winner of the prestigious Turing

Award in 2013. He worked for DEC/Compaq and now Microsoft Research.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

76

Part-Time Parliament problem65’, or ‘The Paxos Parliament protocol’. Currently distributed computing is used for projects that require a large amount of computing
capacity and whereby a lot of data must be processed. Examples are projects in the
field of climate change, genome and space research.
Byzantine Generals Problem
The Byzantine Generals Problem refers to a mathematical problem. This problem is
described in a paper with among others the aforementioned Leslie Lamport66. The
authors make a comparison between the way that decisions are made in the army and
the decision making process used in the control of computer (programs) for the performance of a joint task. Computers (or networks) depend on malfunctioning parts
when processing data (also called fault-tolerant systems). Parts that do not function
as intended, for example due to a power failure. When computers in a network asynchronously cooperate, the result depends on the functioning of, and the relationship
between, the different nodes. The different nodes can give conflicting messages to
each other. A value can be issued twice till another node discovers that there is no
input reference for the issue of a value. The Byzantine Generals Problem is an important challenge for blockchain technology to solve. In order to apply blockchain
technology, nodes must find consensus about the transaction sequence in a distributed network.
The Byzantine Generals Problem in brief means that armies must be able to trust
each other before they attack a fortified city or not, in the simplest variant. Hereby it
is important that there is consensus about the decisions to be made or about the plan
of attack. After all, you will not attack a city if the enemy is too strong, or your fellow
army is too weak or consists of traitors who want to confuse others. Coordination
between the attackers (‘supply side’) and between attackers and city (‘supply’ and
‘demand side’) is important. Only a coordinated attack can be successful. The assumption for a solution to this problem is that all loyal generals must come to the
same plan and the not loyal generals or traitors count for a minority. In Byzantine
times there was no secure internet, telephone or telegraph. Generals had to communicate via messengers. These moved between the armies. But a messenger can be
intercepted and transfer an unwanted message. Another attacker or the defender can
intercept a messenger and change the message (defraud). Then the question is: how
can you trust each other when you cannot trust the message on the basis of which
you have to make a decision?
Let’s assume that the messengers used written messages. A message has a unique
number and the message shows whether or not is has been opened (for example with
the use of a seal). With written and non-mutable messages, the Byzantine Generals
problem can be solved with any number of generals (nodes) and a minority of
65 See also paper by Leslie Lamport: ‘The Part-Time Parliament’. This article appeared in the

magazine 'ACM Transactions on Computer Systems'(May 1998).
66 Together with Robert Shostak and Marshall Pease he wrote the paper: ‘The Byzantine Generals
Problem’ (1982).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

77

possible traitors (fraudulent nodes). This situation is comparable with the Bitcoin
network. The Byzantine Generals problem can be solved with the blockchain algorithm or protocol. The basis of this protocol is to check if the sender has the value:
did a general send a certain message or not and was he the right owner of that message? In addition, it is checked if a general has sent a message more than once, for
example by giving a message a unique number. The challenge is to find an algorithm
to make sure that the generals can come to a consensus, to shared decision (based
on a shared reality). Satoshi Nakamoto took on this challenge and solved it with the
use of the concept of Proof of Work. If you want to defraud a message, for example
by spending a value more than once, you must have more computing capacity (Proof
of Work) than half of the (miner) network. This is almost impossible without centralization.
Free and public internet
An important condition for blockchain technology is the existence of the free and
public internet. An important condition is not only the use of standards such as
TCP/IP, but also a certain governance structure that guarantees free access. In general Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau are seen as the founders of the World Wide
Web. It is important to mention that internet, as technology (ARPANET), already
existed much longer than the commercial use of internet and the World Wide Web.
In 1995 the National Science Foundation Network (NSFnet) was dismantled and
internet was fully released for commercial purposes. Till 1995 NSFnet was the backbone of internet and was mainly used by researchers and scientists.
Digital currency
Digital currency is also called digital money, but it is not the same67. A currency is a
medium of exchange and money is a form thereof. Digital money distinguishes itself
from physical money because it is programmable. Digital money can be transported
from sender to receiver without the intervention of intermediaries. You can compare
this with the sending of an e-mail, from sender to receiver. Digital money can be
managed both centrally as well as locally, regulated and unregulated. Decentralized,
unregulated digital money is often seen as virtual money. In 2012 the European Central Bank defined virtual money as follows68: “A type of unregulated, digital money, which
is issued and usually controlled by its developers, and used and accepted among the members of a
specific virtual community.”
The ECB presents the following schedule to clarify the distinction between the different currencies.
Money format
The Money Matrix

Physical

Digital
None crypto

Crypto

67 Money is a form of currency.
68 See also page 5 from a paper of the ECB: ‘Virtual Currency Schemes', (October 2012).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

Legal status

78

Centralized

Unregulated

Decentralized

Bitcoin

Regulated
Table 3.1: The Money Matrix of the ECB

Besides the aforementioned Wei Dai, the American computer scientist Nick Szabo
was one of the first people to be involved with digital contracts and digital currency.
In 1998 he already designed a mechanism for decentralized digital currency what he
called ‘Bit Gold’. Bit Gold was never implemented as Bitcoin was at the beginning
of 2009. However, Bit Gold is seen as the direct predecessor of Bitcoin and there is
also speculation that Nick Szabo Satoshi is Nakamoto, but he denies that69. However,
he has indicated that there are many similarities between Bit Gold and Bitcoin.
So far, a more detailed explanation of the creation of digital money and Bitcoin and
the building blocks that serves as basis for blockchain technology. Now we continue
with a more detailed explanation of the Bitcoin blockchain. As stated previously,
there are several (types of) blockchains. The Bitcoin Core (BTC) blockchain is one
of them.
3.2 The Bitcoin blockchain
As explained before, the story of Bitcoin started when Satoshi Nakamoto sent a message to the Cryptography Mailing List. The message was sent on 31 October 2008,
with as subject: ‘Bitcoin P2P e-cash paper’. This message included a link70 to a pdf
(white paper). Figure 3.1 shows a copy of this message71.

69 See for example article by Martin O’Leary in The Huffington Post: ‘The Mysterious Disappear-

ance of Satoshi Nakamoto, Founder & Creator of Bitcoin’ (5-5-2016).
70 See also website: bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
71 For a list with e-mails and postings, see also the: Satoshi Nakamoto Institute.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

79

Figure 3.1: Message from Satoshi Nakamoto to a cypherpunk forum

On 9 January 2009 Nakamoto sent the message that the first bitcoin was released
and invited others to participate in the network:
“If you can keep a node running that accepts incoming connections, you'll really be helping the
network a lot. Port 8333 on your firewall needs to be open to receive incoming connections.”
When we as authors are invited for a keynote for instance, we are often asked to
name specific examples of blockchain applications for a certain industry, for a certain
context, for example the recruitment industry, financial sector or government domain. But blockchain basically doesn’t see any context. Blockchain is industry agnostic you could say. For a blockchain it doesn’t matter if the transaction concerns a
bitcoin, hundred bitcoin, this book, a house or a 13.7 billion aircraft carrier. However,
as soon as we start to use Blockchain Organizing from the paradigm of a certain
domain, we immediately miss the essence of Nakamoto’s intention. In one of his
blogs Nakamoto already wrote that he wants to be able to accept every form of value
and every transaction (not just bitcoin): “…The nature of Bitcoin is such that once version
0.1 was released, the core design was set in stone for the rest of its lifetime. Because of that, I wanted
to design it to support every possible transaction type I could think of. The problem was,
each thing required special support code and data fields whether it was used or not, and only covered
one special case at a time. It would have been an explosion of special cases. The solution was script,
which generalizes the problem so transacting parties can describe their transaction as a predicate that
the node network evaluates. The nodes only need to understand the transaction to the extent of
evaluating whether the sender's72 conditions are met.”
72 Please note, just like with the Weconomics model, Nakamoto puts the sender in the centre (in

the sense of: initiator of a transaction). So, the individual who makes the transaction, for example
ordering a book at Bol.com, is at the centre and not the order procedure of Bol.com.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

80

Bitcoin as money
Bitcoin is a number in an accounting system (ledger) what at some point represents
a certain value (has a number) a certain trust. This value, this trust, is only beneficial
to you if other participants in your community will do the same as you do. The numbers get practical value if someone wants to exchange bitcoins for bread, a car or a
dollar and believes that others will act accordingly. Cryptographic digital money, like
bitcoin, will only become a generally accepted medium of exchange (currency) if others trust that they as well can use it as a medium of exchange, as a claim on future
value exchanges. Bitcoins and numbers in a ledger only have value, like the euro and
the dollar, because you and many others believe that they have value. When the trust
in a coin or a number in an accounting system disappears, you cannot exchange the
value that is recorded in the books. When the trust is reduced, the medium of exchange will lose its value. Bitcoin is currently not supported by a government or a
central bank, but by a protocol that ensures that a certain amount of bitcoins can
come into circulation. It is supported by a community with members who believe
that the value of bitcoins will remain constant or increase. This of course attracts
speculators and in this respect, it does not differ from regulated currency. We also
speculate with the dollar and euro.
However fiduciary currencies (fiat currencies; see also table 3.1: The Money Matrix
of the ECB), such as the dollar or euro, are indeed supported by central banks. There
are regulations and instruments such as monetary policy, including quantitative easing for example, to maintain or change inflation and the value of, or confidence in,
the euro or dollar. In general you can say that money, whether it is digital or not, has
the purpose to reduce the insecurity when transactions take place. The higher the
trust level is, the lower the insecurity. But besides the advantage that money offers
as a medium of exchange, money also has other functions that often involve disadvantages such as accumulation, charging interest, derivatives and speculation. Fiduciary currencies, like the euro, are no longer supported by real values such as gold or
the gross domestic product. For more information about money and the role of
money in our economy and society we refer to the Weconomics analysis book, paragraph 5.4: ‘Economy and the role of money’.
In order to send and receive bitcoins you install a software program on your computer. Bitcoin Core is the original program but now there are also variants at the client
side. The software program contains a wallet, what is actually an asymmetrical key
pair. The client software is some kind of key holder with which you can ‘sign’ your
transactions from your wallet. The private key (call it a pin code) provides access to
the wallet, the public key (call it your account number) is the address of the wallet. In
between there is also a digital signature (call it digital fingerprint). A digital signature
works by using these two different keys that are connected to each other: the private
key for creating the signature and a public key for having the transaction checked by
others. You can see the private key as a real password, the signature as proof that you
have the password without having to reveal the identity of the sender.
Wallet software

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

81

Not everyone with a wallet needs to assist in the maintenance of the network. A
(Bitcoin) wallet has two asymmetric keys: a public key and a private key. A wallet is a
piece of software that you can download, say on your smartphone. Using this software you can make payments and check your balance. Wallet software sends a transaction from the sender to the receiver. Subsequently this transaction is (if it complies
with the rules) included in the blockchain during the next acceptance moment. Acceptance is done by miners. You can compare wallet software with an App for internet banking. In the core it is client software to send and receive payments and to
check the balance. There are several providers of wallet software. After you have
downloaded the wallet software, you can also create Bitcoin addresses of your friends.
You can compare this with the address book used in internet banking or your e-mail
address book. The sending and receiving of bitcoins is similar to sending and receiving e-mails. Paying and receiving Bitcoins is even possible by holding two phones
together with NFC technology73. The ‘sent to’ address can be scanned via a QR code.
In figure 3.2 you can see an example of Bitcoin wallet:

Figure 3.2: Example of a Bitcoin wallet

A distinction can be made between offline wallets (for example on your PC), that can
be used to download the complete database, and online wallet software (also called
eWallet). With the latter, you do not have to download any software but you are
dependent on the supplier. You do not have the wallet in your hands and when the
supplier goes bankrupt or has bad intentions, you can lose your bitcoins.
Mining
Mining is finding consensus on the state of a distributed ledger. Nodes verify transactions (keys, signatures, input references and double spending) and find either consensus on it or not. Mining is also a way to arrange transactions in a certain chronological order in a distributed system (sequencing). A central database (of a bank for
instance) has no problem with sequencing: first come first served. Sequencing on a
distributed network is necessary because not all nodes receive a transaction at the
same chronological time. To accept a transaction, you must wrap it in a block so to
73 NFC, Near Field Communication: contactless communication which uses a NFC chip and has

a range of about ten centimetres. This technology can be seen as an extension of the RFID technology (Radio Frequency Identification).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

82

say, whereby, with a hash, a reference to the previous block is made, which creates a
‘fixed’ chain (blockchain). Strict and rigorous rules are applicable to this, based on
mathematical proof. Mining is some kind of competitive lottery whereby you, as individual, almost never can guess the winning ticket. Not even when you buy a lot of
tickets. Therefore, an individual node can never gain control over the network and
for instance, issue an input reference twice. When a block is included in the longest
(chain) branch a miner earns bitcoins (Proof of Work). Therefore, other miners check
the offered block if everything is correct. In addition, they always check if they have
the longest chain. If this is not the case, they automatically switch to the longest chain.
The protocol that ensures that only a limited number of bitcoins can be mined, mainly
applies to rewarding the miners. It does not say a lot about the value of the bitcoin.
After all, a bitcoin is programmable money that you can divide and exchange via
exchange markets. A total of 21 million bitcoins can be made. It is estimated that the
final bitcoin will be brought into circulation somewhere in the year 2140. You can
divide each bitcoin again in 100,000,000 units (also called Satoshi’s). Bitcoins can be
divided up to 8 decimal places (0.000 000 01) and possibly even smaller units if this
might be required in the future when the average transaction size reduces. It is not
known what the value is or will be of this smallest part. This value is usually determined on exchange markets. You can compare these with (border) exchange offices.
Mining is like searching for bitcoins by solving a puzzle. The person who solves the
puzzle first, receives a reward that gets smaller and smaller (in numbers). The reward
is halved after every 210,000 mined blocks. Mining bitcoins, solving the puzzle, was
initially done with a processor (CPU). The level of difficulty of the puzzles to be
solved was much lower then. Nowadays mining is more and more done using the
graphic card of your computer. Special cards have been developed for mining such
as the ASIC (Application Specific Integrated Circuit). During mining not only a puzzle is solved but the transactions are also verified.
If you install bitcoin software to verify transactions, all transactions up to and including the first transaction, are downloaded on your computer. They are not just downloaded but also verified. Please remember that you execute transactions on a blockchain with strangers that you cannot trust. You must be able to check every transaction yourself in the copy of the ledger on your computer. Downloading and verifying
the software can take up to twenty-four hours. But fortunately, you only have to do
this once. On January 1st 2016, the entire file was: 53.7 GB, on January 1st 2017: 96.3
GB and on January 1st 2018: 149.3 GB.

Bitcoin network

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

83

As soon as a new node is added to the network, it is provided with some kind of
address list to make contact with the other nodes74. These become the 'nearest neighbors'. Later on, new addresses are ‘discovered’ from this list and added to the address
list. You could compare this with LinkedIn. You start with the people that you know
and have met personally (tier 1) and from tier 1 you start to build a tier 2 of people
that you do not know personally (yet), etcetera. The address list of the Bitcoin network is expanded to create an unstructured peer-to-peer network, in which each
node ‘communicates’ with a large number of other nodes. Communication is done
in such a way (with mathematical substantiation and proof) that this makes the network sufficiently secure.
In addition to the protocol that is used to create transaction messages and to verify
transactions and blocks, there must also be a ‘system’ to develop, offer, accept and
process software for example. There is discussion about the size of the block for
example. Not all Bitcoin nodes follow the same rules.
It is important to which layer (stack) a rule applies and to what extent this rule influences other layers So, following different rules does not have to be a problem, as
long as the entire system functions as intended. Not all developers will follow the
same rules when implementing the rules. However, developments within Bitcoin
Core75 require community-consensus before adjustments to the rules can be implemented. This is important because other application layers depend on this. An example of such a rule is the size of the block. Within the Bitcoin network we can
distinguish four layers:
1. Core with consensus rules about the level of difficulty of the puzzle that must be
solved with the mining.
2. Peer-to-peer: these rules determine how full nodes share data and which data they
share. It contains rules related to sending and receiving transactions, blocks and
special data packages.
3. Application Programmable Interface (API) and Remote Procedure Call (RPC):
this is a communication layer between the peer-to-peer infrastructure and the application. For example, Bitcoin wallets and block explorers communicate with the
network via this layer.
4. Application (wallet): contains rules about formats for addresses, generating private
key and making backups of your wallet.
The consensus rules of the core are the most important rules of the Bitcoin network.
They organize a number of important matters such as the block size and block
See also article in Bitcoin Magazine by Aaron van Wirdum: ‘Why Some Changes to Bitcoin
Require Consensus: Bitcoin’s 4 Layers’ (26-2-2016).
75 Bitcoin Core (formally Bitcoin-Qt) is currently the third Bitcoin client and co-developed by
Wladimir van der Laan (from Eindhoven, The Netherlands) and based on the original work and
the code of Satoshi Nakamoto. Wladimir is the successor of Gavin Andresen who resigned in
2014 as core maintainer. Andresen was the successor of Nakamoto.
74

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

84

reward, the level of difficulty for solving the puzzle (hash rate) and the type of Proof
of Work that is required. When all nodes follow the same consensus rules, it guarantees that the same copy of a blockchain is maintained. When nodes accept other
consensus rules, they could also accept other blocks that have been rejected by other
nodes. This could create different versions of the same accounting system. As a consequence it does not provide a shared reality and opens the way to fraud.
From Bitcoin to other blockchains
So, we now understand the blockchain concept specifically in relation to Bitcoin and
its underlying blockchain technology. Bitcoin is a form of crypto currency, a form of
value that no longer includes physical or digital money but software code or programmable money. The Bitcoin Core community has no central authority like the
European Central Bank (ECB) but it is a form of distributed authority with a shared
reality in assets and transactions. Core of Bitcoin, the underlying blockchain technology, as well as Blockchain Organizing, is the transaction between sender and receiver,
using coordinating capacity (S → C → D). Hereby value flows, via a transaction,
from supply to demand. Algorithms and encryption is used to make the connection
meaningful, secure and reliable. In fact, the coordinating capacity between demand
and supply is programmed.
Bitcoin is regularly in the news, in a positive sense but often also in a negative sense.
Just as it would not have been smart to assess the value of internet solely based on
e-mail as a replacement of the letter, it will not be smart to judge the power of blockchain technology based on Bitcoin only. But in our opinion, it would be a good development when more people invest time in creating blockchain communities instead of spending time on the speculation what the Bitcoin price will do. Instead of
creating jobs in trading, or worse speculating on something that has to be developed,
it’s better to invest time in the design and development itselves.
Bitcoin is one of the many manifestations of blockchain technology and certainly of
Blockchain Organizing. Bitcoin is proof that blockchain technology can work longterm, is stable and useful. Bitcoin shows that blockchain technology technically
works well and cannot be easily adjusted involuntarily (at acceptable costs). To evaluate if blockchain can do something for your organization it is important not only to
appraise Bitcoin but also to study the underlying blockchain technology. To assess
Blockchain Organizing it is important to look at the underlying organizational model
of the Weconomics Foundation.
So far, a more detailed explanation of the Bitcoin (BTC) blockchain. Now we continue with an explanation of the different types of blockchains that are currently
available.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

85

3.3 Different types of blockchains
Many innovations and their practical applications are similar to their predecessors.
The first television broadcasts were mainly a copy of the radio broadcasts (for example: radio plays or classical concerts with images). The underlying technology was of
course completely different. To embrace new technology it is smart that it is similar
to what we are used to. For example, the first websites were mainly copies of paper
brochures. A skeuomorph is something that seems functional because it looks like
something that we already know. Most use cases or Proof of Concept projects we
see in our consultancy practice come from existing organizations and contain existing
processes. And therein lies a great danger. Blockchain is not business as usual, disguised
as innovation. Blockchain is not meant to digitize existing processes. It is not a change
within a system. It is mainly a change of the system. The system that especially will
change is the firm as superior form to organize work and transactions. But when you
invest too long and too much in a new technology within an existing system it will
lead a life of its own. This happened with the development of internal communication systems based on the TCP/IP protocol in the nineties.
Because old thinking models and interests prove to be persistent, this currently leads
to the development of all kinds of flavors of blockchain. We see an explosion of use
cases and everybody wants to be first and unique and this is where it is already going
wrong. Digital and blockchain are industry agnostic. A blockchain doesn’t care which
value is in ‘the box’ that it transport from A tot B.
Basically, there are two extremes: a variant that is closest to the current way of organizing (permissioned blockchain) and a variant that is the furthest away (permissionless). We mainly believe in the form in between: blockchain for communities or
business-ecosystems. Although blockchain has a lot of standardization in ‘itselves’,
there is no standard yet, like the TCP/IP protocol for internet. Time will obviously
tell which flavors will remain, whether or not there will be a good (good for the
people) standard and how this will look like. Till then it is important to understand
the thoughts and drivers behind these various flavors and developments.
We, as authors of this book, are not neutral when it comes to what flavor a blockchain should have or get. We combine blockchain technology with a, although for
many new, but existing and proven organizational model of the Weconomics Foundation. We believe that the principles of Weconomics correspond to the principles
as described in the white paper of Nakamoto. But Weconomics is not value-free. It
is a community that wants to use organizational technology to create a surplus to
make our welfare more sustainable. You the reader, might not want sustainable welfare but only more welfare? The Weconomics Foundation uses certain values, intents, perspectives, visions and ambitions. So, we also supply a certain blockchain
flavor, but we try to ‘cook’ with widely supported organizational principles as much
as possible and to stay as close as possible to the original organizational principles
that we believe are meant by Nakamoto and his/her predecessors.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

86

According to us, Blockchain Organizing can be best applied within partnerships,
ecosystems, smart networks, shared transaction networks, also called communities.
It makes little sense when a bank, insurance company, government or webshop starts
its own private blockchain. Then we must exchange values between blockchains. In
essence Blockchain Organizing is meant for peer-to-peer transactions within value
chains and communities. Based on this insight you can distinguish the following
blockchains:
▪ B4B: Blockchain For Business (permissioned)
▪ B4P: Blockchain For People (permissionless)
▪ B4C: Blockchain for Communities (hybrid)
An important difference in flavor is the difference between private (permissioned)
and public (permissionless) blockchains. We believe that combinations of these two
extremes are also possible. Usually we call these combinations: hybrid blockchains.
We see these three flavors on the internet as well: open internet, login internet and
intranet. According to us, there are essentially two main flavors: a decentral and a
central flavor. The central flavor (top-down) is mainly fed by existing organizations
with old DNA, old conditionings and the idea that we require certain institutions to
organize trust. The decentral flavor (bottom-up) is expressed in the original idea from
Nakamoto. Central or old thinking is not necessarily wrong, but when you continue
too long with old thinking in a new (digital) context, things could go wrong. We have
seen this with companies like Eastman Kodak or Blockbuster. They probably went
bankrupt because they continued too long with old thinking in an environment that
digitizes more and more. The tragedy with Eastman Kodak is that they invented the
change that eventually killed it.
It seems almost inevitable, but our constant tendency towards centralism, which we
can also see in the Bitcoin blockchain, property and shielding is widely present,
driven by evolution and it is difficult to stop. It goes back to our ancient survival
instinct. After all, you have collected something or found a fertile plot of land. This
gives you freedom, welfare and a higher survival rate and you want to secure this.
Everything that subsequently affects the status quo, you rather want to exclude. But
it is like Leon Megginson76 formulated it:
“It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent,
but rather the one most adaptable to change.”
You usually have gone to great lengths to acquire or experience what you currently
possess. Therefore, we will defend the existing with all we have against ‘robbers’,
competitors or people who want to share. After all, much energy and money were
spent on collecting the existing. Of course, you will not give that up easily. The whole
76 Leon Megginson, professor at the Louisiana State University tried to summarize Darwin’s cen-

tral idea in the book ‘On the Origin of Species’, during a speech for the Southwestern Social Science Association and came to this formulation (1963).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

87

idea of ‘my property’ and of ‘wanting to control’ is the foundation for this. Because
if you have more (goods, knowledge, food) than someone else, theoretically you have
a higher survival rate. But apart from this pattern, we are also social animals and our
survival rate and standard of living increases when we cooperate. This might surprise
you, but our ancient instincts and dispositions still play a role, also in the development of blockchain. Maybe they play an even more important role than many might
expect or hope for. At this moment in any case you’ll see that the technique does not
immediately change the behavior of people (speculation, opportunistic behavior, etcetera) regarding for example Initial Coin Offerings (ICO) and the development of
crypto futures.
Before we further discuss the two main flavors of blockchain (B4B and B4P) and the
hybrid form (B4C), first an addition to the question: ‘What is actually the difference
between central, decentral and distributed?’ We will explain the difference between
these three forms in more detail in the following paragraph.
Central, decentral and distributed
As indicated before, blockchain technology can be used for maintaining a distributed
ledger (divided across the participating nodes). However, when a ledger is technically
distributed, it does not necessarily mean that power is also distributed. Everyone can
buy bitcoins, but not everyone can open a bank account. A blockchain may be distributed in infrastructural terms, just like internet, but that does not mean that the
power is also distributed. A widely used picture to display the difference between
central, decentral and distributed networks is the depiction by Paul Baran77. With his
research, Paul Baran contributed to the design of internet. He suggested to make the
communication network robust, (for example the failure of the network due to a
nuclear attack), by working with packages that would be transported from sender to
receiver via different nodes. At the receiver end, the different packages would ‘merge’
again. This principle is the basis for internet and therefore also for blockchain and is
called ‘packet switching’, or package-switching (see also the TCP/IP protocol in paragraph 3.1).

77 Paul Baran (1926-2011), originally a Polish engineer, but moved to the US later on. He studied

packet-switched networks (Asynchronous Transfer Method) and worked for Rand Corporation,
among others.

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

88

Figure 3.3: Paul Baran: difference between central, decentral and distributed network structure
from infrastructural perspective

In figure 3.3 there are three different variants. But actually, there are four if you include the governance aspect, in addition to the technical aspect.
Four different forms
An extension of figure 3.3 does not only depict the technical aspect, but also the
chosen governance model. As mentioned before, in addition to technology, especially the chosen organizational model and, within this the governance perspective,
is important. What are old interests and legacies and how do these emerge in the new
design? With a central protocol you can still have a lot of power in a peer-to-peer
network. Examples are business platforms like Airbnb and Uber. Another and more
comprehensive picture than figure 3.3, can be found in the blog of the company
Maidsafe78. This also includes the governance aspect, in addition to the technical
aspect. We then have four variants:
1. (Fully) central
2. Distributed and within:
3. Decentral and within:
4. Peer-to-peer (fully decentral).

78 See article by author Ioptio: ‘Evolving Terminology with Evolved Technology: Decentralized

versus Distributed’ (4-12-2015).

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

89

Figure 3.4: Four different networks from infrastructural and governance perspective

In Figure 3.4 you immediately recognize the difference between infrastructure and
‘being in control’. In other words: a distributed network (infrastructural) can indeed
be controlled centrally (governance). An example of this is the SETI project79,
whereby thousand computers release a piece of computing power but are indeed
controlled centrally. An important example of a decentralized blockchain, ‘without’
central stakeholder and with a peer-to-peer infrastructure, is the current Bitcoin network. Naturally you can call Nakamoto, who could mine the first bitcoin easily and
therefore probably became ‘rich’, a stakeholder. But at this moment anyone who
wants to join, can. Nobody will be excluded by a central authority. Whether you also
have the opportunity and can invest enough to mine bitcoins is another story. But in
the design, nobody and everyone has ‘the power’. Thousands of computers (nodes)
assist to validate the transactions and to forward these to other nodes.
These are two important features of a technically distributed situation: validating and
forwarding without exclusion. The so-called full nodes, guarantee the decentralized
character of the network. For example, there must be ‘consensus’ in more than fifty
percent of the entire network. Consensus about the validity of a transactions. There
is not one node that can determine the sequence and what the others should do. The
‘democratic law’ of half + 1 applies in this system. If more than fifty percent of the
79 See also website: seti.org

Boek8_Kopie_Intern_Gebruik_Weconomics

90

participating nodes agree with a transaction, this will also be valid and that will be the
new shared reality. The new valid transaction is ‘added’ to the already existing shared
reality (accounting system). The design is based on the fact that it would be impossible that one single node or party can solely achieve this majority. That this eventually
could be different in the practice of mining pools, Nakamoto could probably not
